Uh, good morning and welcome to the
Social Service Committee, select Committee.
Uh, so we have the Ministry of Social Development, um,
this morning, uh, for the,
and we have the minister for first 20 minutes, um, to,
uh, answer questions from the committee.
So, welcome. What I might ask is, um, just
to make a brief opening statement
and then move to questions from members.
And I'll, we have limited time, so we will be asking
for very concise, um, questions and answers.
Great, Paul. Good morning everyone.
Um, great to be here with you this morning.
Um, and I just want to say it's great
to have the MSD team here, uh, lead by Debbie Power, um,
who you will be well familiar with.
Um, so it's great to have the opportunity
to, to be here today.
As I said at the estimates hearing in May, uh, my highest
priority as the minister is to support New Zealanders
and to work while ensuring those
who generally can't work are able
to draw on support when they need it.
I'm committed to the government's target
of reducing the number of people on jobs, seek support
by 50,000 by the year 2030.
And our government's focused on supporting people on welfare
into employment and providing them
with greater opportunities to get ahead.
Welfare that works mean,
has meant a greater focus on young people,
and we now also have a much more active welfare system.
I'm conscious we've only got a short time,
so I'll just do some brief, um, comments
through Budget 25 vote.
Social development received additional funding
and key areas that align with our priorities, uh,
while also reducing expenditure
and delivering services more efficiently.
So while you would expect focusing on the government's
target, uh, we have put additional, um, frontline staff 490
into, um, supporting our target to reduce the number
of people on jobs seeker benefit, as well
as support into employment programs
to help more people get into work.
Uh, we've also been making investments into services
that will lead to future reductions in expenditure.
Uh, budget 25,
confirm the multi-year transformation program,
which is called MSD Services for the future.
Um, a big, uh, increase of
activity has been in the redress for survivors of abuse
and state care, including increased payments,
and there are other, um, initiatives as well around, um,
food security distribution, pick start breakfast, et cetera.
But the real focus has been getting people into work
and off the job seeker benefit, um, as it would be expected
with the current economic climate, the overall number
of people receiving a benefit has increased, um, ahead of
what we see will be a forecast decrease
from December onwards.
The focus on employment
and proactive staff engagement has been
helping more people into work.
So we've seen 80,700 in the year in review, exiting,
uh, welfare into work 10,000 more than the previous year.
So despite there being economically, uh, challenging times,
um, the work that MSD has been doing has been paying off.
So, uh, at June, 2025,
70,837 people were in case management,
nearly 10,000 of those over the phone.
Um, the needs assessments
and individual job plans means a real focus on individuals.
What are the barriers those individuals face?
And then having a plan to address them, clear expectations,
um, about what steps they need to take.
So that is, you know, a clear path, uh,
to support people off welfare and to work.
And we're getting results. Uh,
and may we introduced two new obligations, um, around, um,
or obligation failure, sanctions, money management,
and community work experience.
Uh, and as I've said, the work we are doing around welfare,
that works a focus on young people
and a more active welfare system is delivering results.
So there's always more we can do, uh,
and that's why we'll continue
to help people overcome the challenges they have to prepare
for work and find a job.
So thank you and I'm happy to answer your questions.
Thank you, minister. The
first question was Jenny Anderson.
Oh, thank you very much. Uh, minister, uh, in August, 2024,
you, uh, launched community coaching at Youth
Inspire in the Heart Valley.
Uh, subsequently you cut their funding
to the point they're going to close. Why did you do that?
Yeah, so youth coaching is part of welfare that works.
Um, really great initiative, which means
that we can work more with individuals, um, more closely.
Uh, as you would expect, um, there are procurement processes
that MSD undertake on a regular basis, um, to ensure
that the services that we are delivering, um,
are getting the results we expect.
And when there are changes to procurement,
there are services in that location who are able
to deliver the same services.
So while I accept it's challenging for an organization that,
um, comes to an end of a contract, uh,
and where a new provider is chosen, uh, I accept that
that's challenging for an organization that is part
of business, uh, that MSD undertakes, uh,
each and every year.
And that is part of ensuring
that taxpayers are getting the best value
for every dollar invested
With unemployment at a record high in a decade,
and youth unemployment at 15.2%,
why is a provider like Youth Inspire
that provides the only service like
that in the HU Valley now being unfunded
with 157 young people waitlisted
who want employment but can't be placed?
So my understanding is that, uh, with any contract like
that, they have plenty of notice.
Um, MSD ensures that the people they're working
with can continue to be served, uh, until the end
of the period of their funding.
Um, and there are other services in the area available.
Um, as I've said previously in the house,
and I'll just uh, put it on record here, uh,
when we have had a period, uh, with a previous government
where excessive spending, 47% of spending
during the COVID years had nothing to do
with COVID Recovery.
What follows is high inflation, high interest rates, low
or no, no growth, recession and unemployment.
We are at that point of the cycle now, um,
and we are doing everything we can
to support more people into employment.
As I said in my opening comments,
we've invested in additional staff
and additional employment programs, um, to support people.
Can you see how New Zealanders, uh, struggle
to take you at your word when there are is a provider
who works with hard to reach young people
with 157 now in the books wanting work
and some, another provider
who won't take those young people
has been given the funding.
So there is nowhere for those young people
to find the support they need to get a job,
and your government is telling them
that they need to find work.
Well, I'm not sure where you are getting your information
from because the contract doesn't start
until the 1st of July, 2027.
This is an annual review looking backwards.
But let me finish this part of your question.
Um, providers in
that area have been selected in a competitive process
to ensure that the best providers are delivering services
to young people, whether it's in the HU
or whether it's in any part of New Zealand.
We are absolutely focused on ensuring more people,
particularly more young people work,
move from welfare into work.
Absolutely. Um, and there will be other providers in
that area who will work with young people. They
Do not. So
I would, would be very careful.
I have said already that there are services in the hut
that will de be delivering each of the services that
that provider covers currently. And your
Provider won't work well, SU
Supplementary Laura, applicable.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. Mr.
Are you able to elaborate on the Welfare That Works program,
um, and give us some examples of where you've increased, um,
what those programs look like?
Yeah, so for example, we have 2000 in job coaching.
Those numbers will increase as the years progress,
but if we look at the year in review, um,
job coaching has been a significant part
of welfare that works.
Uh, it's really looking at, uh, working intensively
with young people, as I said, a needs assessment, um,
to look at what are the individual barriers
that young person faces.
And we've got amazing providers around the country, um,
that are delivering services, not not just one in the hut.
Uh, and I really want to commend the services that do work
with young people in challenging circumstances,
but it's working one-on-one.
It's a very intensive coaching program.
It is looking at how do we support them
to overcome the individual barriers.
They have an individual employment plan
that they are held accountable to.
Um, so there are things that they are required to do,
but there's things that MSD is also required to do often
through a contracted provider.
And we want to ensure that
that young person is getting the maximum
support, um, available.
'cause what we do want to see is
that they move into employment,
but a key to that is they stay in employment.
So one of the aspects of the job coaching, uh, that's part
of welfare that works, is to also ensure that the employer
is being supported.
Uh, and the job coach is a bridge between the young person,
uh, and the employer.
And, uh, I met with a business, uh, in Auckland last week.
They've taken 41 people off the jobeer benefits
since the end of September.
Um, and they're seeing amazing results
with the people they're employing.
Um, so it's, it's great to see it working.
And as I say, I'm really proud of the strong results
for the number of people exiting, uh,
benefit into work. Any
Question, Ricardo? Much?
And I may just do some quick follow up questions
'cause we've got such limited time,
but what percentage of people
who participated in the community coach, uh,
program actually got a job?
Uh, I don't have that data in front of me,
so let's, are you
Aware that it's closer to 20%?
Well, you'll remember that sometimes the,
the stats are taken at a point in time.
Um, and often that is not when the young person has
completed the program.
Um, so I just wanna make sure
that we are talking about the right set of data.
Um, we have programs like some of those providers, um,
have been working with young people for a very long time.
Uh, and many of the providers are the ones
that have picked up, uh, the job coaching programs.
Uh, and I've visited, visited many of them,
and they're getting great results.
And, and as, as I say,
and as many of you will be aware, uh, some
of the young people they're working
with have incredibly challenging lives
and have multiple difficulties, which is why we want
to work with them intensively.
Why has the decline for advances
for assistance like clothing
and electricity has skyrocketed under
the past financial year?
Uh, well, what we want to ensure is that every dollar
that, uh, goes out is, is targeted, goes to those
who have needs.
Um, but also we have a responsibility to the taxpayers
who are earning that money to ensure that
that is being dispersed in a way
that they would expect is responsible and fair.
So are you comfortable with the fact
that we've got increased unemployment,
increased hardship in our communities,
and yet over the past fin financial year,
if we look at a period of two years, for example,
the decline rate for advances has doubled?
Well, uh, what I would say is if we look at, for example,
food hardship, um, $129 million in the year in review,
uh, it's at a similar level, uh, to
what we've seen pre COVID.
I'm asking about advances,
sorry, which is quite different.
Okay, well I don't have that data in front
of me, so I'll leave any stage.
Are you aware it double Aware? Uh, I'm aware
that the number of, um,
there is an increase in the number of declines.
Let me talk to you about to advances.
'cause I'm really concerned about advances.
There's been no policy change,
but I'm really concerned about advances
because what it means is people have less in their benefit
in the weeks going forward.
So I'm not sure the benefit advance is
necessarily a good idea.
Uh, when people turn up to MSD, uh, with challenges, so,
sorry, the last question that all you are
doing all you're last question.
And if the member is, if the member is advocating
for a larger number of, um, advances, I,
I would be really surprised
'cause that pushes people into more financial hardship in
the weeks and months ahead.
Are you aware though, that under current policy settings,
people access advances
'cause they just simply cannot make ends meet
and cover the costs in front of them
and advance, this is one of the few tools to, for example,
prevent them losing access to electricity?
Yeah, so we've got very challenging times.
No one around this table would be surprised.
Um, 'cause you'd be dealing with people every week, people
who are in work and
and who are in benefit, who are finding it challenging
with the cost of living at the moment,
which is why it is the primary focus
or of our government to get it under control.
And as I said, when we've had periods of excessive spending
that has led to high inflation, high interest rates.
Uh, and to see that the inflation rate has come down from
7.3 to 3% in two years is remarkable.
But it means that people are still
feeling it tough right now.
We need to stick with our plan
focusing on reducing inflation
and reducing the cost of living.
But I accept that there will be households
who are finding it tough right now.
Your question Al Oh no.
Um, somebody, um, minister, you've talked,
you've talked about, um, the case management for, you know,
people on benefit and the contracts that are associated
with that in the community.
Can you just clarify for the committee about the, um,
outcomes that you expect to be measured
and delivered by those organizations?
Yeah, so there's, there's two things.
So in terms of case management
and MSD have had, um, a very strong record of evaluating
the effectiveness of their programs.
So of their investment, 64% are evaluated
for their effectiveness,
and of that 94% are deemed to be effective,
um, or promising.
So it is really important
that when there is investment into programs,
we know that they're effective.
But let's take the step before that.
So that is case management.
So we've got 70,000 in case management,
10,000 over the phone.
It is the case manager who will then work
with the individual to say this
and refer them to a contracted provider.
So we need to ensure, first
and foremost we've invested more in case management.
'cause that is the most effective intervention, uh,
for supporting people into work.
We've got a higher proportion
of young people in case management.
We've got 45%, uh, 48%, uh, of,
of Maori in case management
because it is the most effective.
And then when there is a referral to a provider,
we also want to ensure that the provider
that we are referring for the contracted services
are delivering outcomes and results.
And that is monitored every year.
Um, and we are very comfortable with stopping programs
that are not getting the results we expect, uh,
and ensuring that programs are funded, uh, that are able
to demonstrate results and deliver outcomes.
Uh, and in most cases the outcomes are employment outcomes.
In some cases it is further training or education.
Um, but we do want to see obviously more people in work.
Quick stop on that. Um, do, do you have any figures
that show to date how that is tracking the,
the case management or the, the contracts?
Um, well the outcomes for those young people. Yeah.
So in terms of case management, I might just pass to
Debbie. So case
management, as the minister said, is one
of the most effective tools.
So what we know is that in the majority
of exits are coming from case management.
And we've got, um, we've got, uh, as the minister said,
70,000 people.
We, we evaluate the effectiveness of case management.
It is part of what we call a catalog of employment programs.
It is published on our website.
People can go in there, it's very transparent
and look at what is effective and what is not effective.
And then we adjust over time.
The people that we put into case management is informed by
what we call an employment investment strategy.
So we look at the exits that we've got
and the results that we've got in a previous year,
and we look to adjust them on an ongoing basis.
What we know is that the most effective time
for somebody in case management is within
the first 12 months.
The longer people are in case management.
Your effectiveness does wane a bit, um, over time.
But that's the time that we want to get people.
As the minister said, we've got most young people now under
25 in case management, be it phone case
or, um, you know, a person in a site.
Um, and, uh, 62% are Maori or Pacific.
So Julie, thank you.
Have you regularly said, minister,
that you don't want to see young people
Consigned to a life on welfare.
Do you collect information on providers, rejection rates
of clients if they decline to work with MSD?
Because in the Heart Valley we have a situation
where someone, a provider with a track record
of placing young people into employment has not received
funding and the funding has gone to a provider
that regularly rejects referrals from MSD.
Well, I think you are, you are speaking into the future.
You are speaking of a provider that is funded through
until the end of June next year.
Um, so I, I think, uh, it would be reasonably unusual
that, uh, someone, an alternative provider
that hasn't started that service could be rejecting a client
of a provider who's currently being
Funded a track record in the community
of rejecting MSD referrals. Do you keep record of that?
Um, I would have to ask MSD if they
have information about that.
But as I said this, this is an annual review. I'd
Like to hear from you, Ms. D, do they keep
that information?
Do they know if, if a provider's rejected those
Referrals? Well, as I said,
the program that you are referring to
or the provider still has funding until the 30th of June,
so you are completely talking about a, um,
a made up example
because the contract that they have isn't
until the 30th of June next year. If we put
That to one side, I just like the question, if they get
that data, I'd like to know, do
Question the chair, like a, like a, we
Just an answer from officials though,
to understand. Do they report?
I think, I think the minister has made it clear you're
talking about future, this, this annual
review. Looking back at year,
I just would like to know, do they report rejections?
Is that in general not specific to any budget year?
I'd like to know whether they using
report that data quickly.
Question. Yep.
So if, if there, if providers are refusing
to take referrals, we would want to know about that. Do
You after That? Um,
we wouldn't, we would want to know about that
and we would be, we would be monitoring
that People at the regional level will know if it's a
regional contract, what is the status of the providers
and how are they operating?
It would, if, if providers are funded to work
with a particular cohort of people
and they're refusing to take that, um,
those referrals, we would know about it. Thank you.
Thank, Thank you minister.
We are at time and so thank you for, uh, your time. Morning
Committee.
Thank you. Thank you.
I'm sure.
Hmm.
Alright, well welcome.
So, so, um, now we'll move into, um, uh,
strictly questions, uh, for you.
But, um, firstly take the
opportunity to welcome you here this morning.
Uh, and if you want to take a moment to introduce yourself
and me as a good team, uh,
and then move into opening statements.
And from there we'll then move the questions from you.
Sure. Um, uh, UA
and, um, thank you for the opportunity to appear.
I have, um, with me, my leadership team,
I'm not gonna waste everybody's time
by introducing everybody.
Just to say that we,
I have officials here from disability support services
and from the Child Wellbeing and Poverty Reduction Group.
Um, minister Upton already covered, um, a number
of areas in her opening remarks.
I have no intention of repeating those.
Um, I would just simply say from our perspective, um,
although not without, without its challenges,
I think MSD has delivered a solid performance, uh,
across many, um, areas in the last year.
We all know that we are operating in context
of difficult economic conditions
and we've seen the impact of that.
Obviously there's been an increase in unemployment in the
people who coming to MSD for support.
And on one hand we are seeing more job seekers, um,
who have never had to ask for assistance before.
But what comes with that is many
of those people are highly skilled
and have relevant in recent work history.
So pro 42% of the people
who have come onto benefit in the last, um,
job seeker benefit in the last 12 months have moderate
or high skills, skill levels, sorry,
commonly known as level one to three.
Um, I'm proud of the way our frontline has coped
with high workloads and despite that we are
and have got 80,000, that 700 people offer benefit
and into work in the last year, as the minister said,
that's 10,000 more than the year before.
We're answering our phone calls more quickly
and our accuracy and timeliness has approved.
And I know that this has been an issue for this, um,
for this committee in the past.
We're going in the right direction,
but of course we've got much more to do.
70,000 people.
We've already discussed that in case management.
We've had a 60% increase in proactive employment
conversations and appointments.
Our community coaches are now working with young people,
2,100 places this year,
which will increase over the coming years.
Our transformation program has started.
It is on track to modernize our systems
and change the way we work.
And last week we met one
of the key milestones in the delivery
of a new contracting system,
which will make a big difference
for our providers and communities.
We successfully transitioned disability support function
to MSD late last year
and have made progress to stabilize the system.
We continue to invest in resilient communities
through funding organizations such as to do family violence
and sexual violence services.
Um, the child wellbeing poverty reduction groups now
sits within MSD.
We're investing, um, our resources where we need it.
Most of the minister talked about the 490 extra frontline
staff that we've got, and that's to help us manage demand.
Our people remain focused on delivering priorities
and the delivery of frontline call services.
Um, if you wanna ask us questions, obviously let's go now,
but I do wanna finish by thanking the committee
for the work that you do.
Um, acknowledging the team back at MSD departments
that we work with and wish you all
of your new process 'cause that's coming soon.
Indeed. Thank you. Uh, first question Kel.
Um, thank you. Um, first of all, I would like
to acknowledge what you do an exemplary, um,
department in many ways.
Um, but what I wanna ask you about is the 18, 19 year olds,
um, first self, first part around structure
of agenda is income support.
And they're a group that lose that.
I have been concerned about some of the issues
around parents who have, um, had they maybe sole parents,
they might be on 60,000 or $70,000.
There's suddenly in a, uh, position
where there's a lot more unemployment in that cohort
and they might have, uh, uh, have had an agreement with, um,
the other parent to pay child support.
Those people, how are you dealing with them given
that they will have lost support from the parent?
'cause that will have come to an end.
Um, and now they will be in a situation
where they have less money
and they're expected to support, um, teenagers
and they're not cheap.
Um, so I might get Simon to talk a little bit about the,
um, the po the policy detail,
but there will be an, um, in relation to the 18
and 19-year-old policy, there will be both a, as you know,
a parental income test, um, as well
as a parental support gap test.
So it's not just one
or the other, if you want me to,
if we can explain both of those.
Um, so one is the amount of money and two, whether
or not that it is appropriate for the young person
to have the support of, um,
that parent does. Does that make sense?
No, Simon. Okay. Okay.
So, Um, so that, that, that, yeah.
So I'll just, um, just elaborate
on Debbie's point and just
Focus on this child support issue.
No, this, this is relevant to it. It's relevant to it.
Okay. So, um, there's currently, uh,
for people in the youth parent payment system at what's
called a parental gap test, which is basically focused on
situations where there's a either a serious breakdown in the
relationship or the parent is dead or overseas
or the child is in a victim of abuse.
And so in a sense, that's the main way in which people
between 16 and 17 get access to a benefit is
where that gap exists.
So the new regime regime for 18
to 19 year olds will include both that test,
which is essentially about family breakdown,
and then it will include a parental income test, which is,
uh, if you are, if the parental income is below $65,000,
you'll still be eligible to receive a benefit.
Yes. But in those situations,
there's been a parental agreement for a certain amount
to come across that's gone.
There's no that those finish
And that's gap.
And that's because child support applies
below the age of 18.
Yes. But so they're over 18. Yes.
They're No longer supported under this scheme.
And those schemes all assumed those,
those parental agreements all assumed that they would,
they would stop paying.
So there's no legal obligation on them to pay.
Yeah. So the it, so the question, sorry,
the question I think you're asking is
in relation to the new policy.
So child support applies to, uh, parental circumstances
and which parent and what circumstances pays child support.
Yeah. What we are talking about is when the child turns 18
and therefore applies for an income support payment,
what will happen in relation to assessing the entitlement of
that, of the 18-year-old
Supplementary regard?
Thank you. Um, so I understand
that this policy is in relationship to an ongoing target
of reducing the number of people in the benefit, um,
which is part of the financial year we're reviewing.
Would you mind expanding on the advice you
provided in the regulatory impact segment as
to why this policy could lead
to greater demand from services like food banks,
Banks? Um, well, I think
the, just a range of observations.
So us providing advice to the minister on the risks
and implications of the policy is just part of the natural,
um, business's what we do.
I so this, that's
Accept that Then the minister makes the
calls about what that happens.
So I think obviously in any situation where a family
faces a, a potential reduction at overall income,
I can't really hear the answer for the chatter,
Sorry. In any circumstance
where a family faces a potential
reduction in income that might, there's huge roles, Ricardo,
Sorry that that might I can't, I can't hear you.
That might lead to people accessing
support from food banks.
That is a mitigated
by the way the policies ended up being shaped, which is
introducing the parental income test basically means that
for families with income's less than $65,000,
a person can still apply for the benefit.
Just as a quick, as a quick follow up on that,
do you think that a family and a household say of three
or potentially for earning, uh, $68,000 combined
would be earning enough to not need, uh,
assistance from food banks?
I think those are different sorts of questions.
So one question is in relation to the policy
that guides eligibility for a young person to get support,
your question is
what is our view about the appropriate level
of income in a household
and whether a household would access food banks or not?
That's a, they're slightly different issues in many
respects, Ricardo,
because you would be looking at the whole, the whole family.
We know that, um, that that there are families
who are in employment who access
hardship assistance from a range of people,
be it food banks or, or others.
But just to clarify, sorry, through the, you told us
that the mitigating factor to the fact
that you warned the minister
that the policy could result in more people needing food
banks was the income threshold.
Now that income threshold is quite low for a family.
Um, and so how can
a $68,000 combined income
for a family be a mitigating factor to the advice you
provided that this policy could cause harm?
So, um, mitigation in the sense of it ameliorates,
it doesn't necessarily completely remove the issue,
I think was how that, um, to DB's point, uh, families
who are basically earning income through work
and low income families may access support
from other areas as well.
I'm stop, it's kind of a three part question,
but, um, so I'll hopefully cover all of it,
but, uh, can you just clarify the age this applies to
and whether that's, and what the definition
of a child in New Zealand is?
Um, two, uh, what the, um, uh, confirm
that this is only, uh, applying to people who are,
are not young people who are not in employment or training.
And, and thirdly, uh, what the statistics are
for young people who go on unemployment
and the length of time
that they likelihood be on unemployment, uh, if, if they,
you know, don't go get into employment
trail training early in their lives.
So this is directed at 18 and 19 year olds.
Um, 18 year olds are above the legal definition
of a child in New Zealand.
Um, uh, so that's where it's,
I'm sorry, it was a third part of your question.
Um, Definition of a child that
Was your question covered, covered that one.
And, and that's, um, employment or training? Oh, um, 18.
So in terms of young people,
if we're talking about average future years on benefit,
which is, uh, I think third part, yeah.
So if, um, young people,
and this is people who access, um, potentially youth payment
and youth young parent payment.
Um, September 24 was, um, 25 years.
And just the la last page, just, just confirming that, um,
if a, if an 18 or 19-year-old is an employment
or training, um,
Sorry. If you were in employment
and working full-time, you wouldn't have been in eligible
for a benefit and training anyway.
Anyway. And if you're in training, you're still be entitled
to student support, student support in terms
of student loans or student allowances if you
qualify for student allowances.
Thank you. The primary You Christian Ricardo?
Yeah, thank you. Hey, how many people had
to renew the supported living payment
over the past financial year?
How many people have had to
Renew it, renew their supported living payment Asen,
for example, have to provide new medical certificates
to show that if they're an amputee,
that they're still an amputee.
So, um, my understanding, I think this is, um, about
to December last year rather than to the financial year,
about 40% of people don't,
Don't renew their support.
Don't. So at, so the two year,
I presume you're talking about the two year, um, issue.
So for, for um, members, the supported living payment, um,
has a high threshold of entry.
But when you are, when you're granted a supported living
payment, the requirement is
that it is reviewed every two years,
but, um, that review can be waived in certain circumstances
and about 40% of people don't have it renewed.
That's Just, and that is,
and that would be the right thing to do
because some people who are on supported living payments,
it would be inappropriate to do that.
Is it your view that people, who, is it your view
that it is a good use of resources and the healthcare system
and an MSD that people with lifelong conditions, um,
who may never be able to work
and have really serious medical conditions have
to continue proving that they have those lifelong medical
conditions each two years?
Um, my job is to administer this, the benefit system
as the log is currently is currently in place.
And what requires us to do is to, to to assess people
for their eligibility for a supported living payment
and then do a two year review.
But as I say, 40% of people are not reviewed,
are not required to do the two year,
and that is based on judgment in relation
to the condition that they have.
And I think that that's, that is appropriate
and that is what the rules say. Finally,
Have you, have you spent any resources
or time preparing any documentation
or advice to progress the coalition agreement item
to have a designated pool of doctors that can be the ones
that approve, uh,
people entering the supported living payment?
And if so, how many resources
or time have you spent developing that policy?
Um, that is a manifesto commitment
of the coalition government.
I know. And, um,
and, um, that those decisions haven't been made.
That wasn't my question is whether you
started preparing any
Advice, those are not, those decisions have not been made,
But have you prepared as question, answer and answered,
but have you prepared any briefings?
That's not the question.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, my question has to do
with the traffic light system.
Um, as a constituent mp, I do get a lot
of people coming into our offices, um, asking for
assistance in, um, navigating the system.
Mm-hmm. Uh, it seems to me that there are a lot, um mm-hmm.
But I do understand that, uh, there's only about 2%
who are not able to comply
with the traffic light system. Could you
Please talk us through the numbers
of the traffic light system?
So, um, currently there are 98.5%
of people, so 345,000 of people
who the traffic light system applies to, uh,
what we would call green.
So no problems meeting obligations all good.
We have 0.6% that are orange, um,
which is 1,953 people,
and 1% who are red,
which is about 3,189 people.
Of the people who are red, um, two thirds
of them are less than four weeks.
Okay. Well, thank you. So
The, the summary of knows the, almost everyone,
but a very, very small number of people,
People That's exactly right.
And the tra and what we, what we hear what we do here is,
there are some, of course, there will always be people who,
um, have, have challenges,
but what we hear both from, um, from the front line,
both in terms of our staff
and clients, is they appreciate the, um, the transparency
of the color arrangements in order
to understand whether they should be doing something that,
you know, they're not sure, you know,
whether they're meeting or not or they're good to go.
And like I say, 98.5% are green, nothing
to worry about doing what was required.
Thank you. Supplement. Ricardo,
What percentage of benefit sanctions, um, when,
what percentage of benefit sanctions
that have been applied have been overturned
after a review of decision has been filed?
Um, I don't, I don't have, I I don't have that with me.
Um, there's a cer certain points
through the sanction process where you can,
if you like, challenge this decision.
The first is you get an obligation fail.
So the first, the first time that something happens, you get
what we call an obligation fail.
Within that you have five days with which to contact us.
Okay. I know that, I know, I'm just explaining it
for the benefit of others.
You have five days. So you have an opportunity then,
then if you get all the way
through a sanction being actually applied, you can apply
for a review of decision at that point.
Um, I can get you the numbers. Thank you.
Sorry. Yes, I can get you.
Well, what do you, let me rephrase it then.
What would you say to frontline organizations who have found
that most of the time when they file a review of decision,
they're able to overturn a sanction or a decline?
And what does that tell you about the
accuracy of decision making?
Well, I would check, I would want to check those numbers.
New question, ma. Um, thank you very much.
Um, can I just ask about the, um, benefit
entitlement assessments?
So we see in the annual report that, um, from not, uh,
2020 for the standard is 95% Yeah.
Accuracy. And then, um, it's slowly declined.
And then in the last financial report, annual report, it's,
there's this very slight uptick.
Yeah. Is that the beginning of the new trend?
Um, um, this committee raised their concern in relation
to accuracy last time.
And we've taken that very, very seriously.
Um, we have eight accuracy measures.
Um, the one that you are talking about is in, is one
of the eight, um, six
of our accuracy me measures are exceeding standards meeting
or exceeding standards.
We have one that is just slightly on the, on the border.
This one in particular, we raised the standard from 90
to 95% a few years ago.
So we raised, we raised that, um, as part
of looking at our KPIs and we raised it up.
Um, the, what we, what we have done is a range of things.
I can get George to talk about it,
but at the moment, currently our accuracy rate is 84.2%
and in the last month of November alone we are 88.7%.
So what we are doing is working, um, these,
these measures are notoriously difficult to, um,
to change quickly because it is a rolling 12 month average.
And so if you, if you start on a downward trajectory,
you've gotta really get a lot, you know, a long time
before you start to turn.
We are confident that we have turned that, um,
and the things that we are doing
and putting in place works for the committee's benefit.
Most of the errors are not occurring in main
benefit entitlements.
It's in supplementaries.
That's, I'm not making an excuse about that.
I'm just saying that that's where most
of the errors are occurring.
But yes, we are confident that we are turning, um,
turning the curve on that.
Thank you. Um, your question, Jamie,
Is it okay to go into employment support? Um, Mr. Chair,
Oh, oh, sorry. Sorry, I'll go
back. Sorry, I forgot Ricardo Supplementary.
Just a quick supplementary of that.
Um, when you say that, uh,
lowest accuracy rate is on the supplements,
which supplements are you talking about?
Um, some of the, some of the supplements are, um,
disability allowance
because of the complexity of that policy.
That's probably the main one.
You, as you will know, it's, it's all of the different costs
that you can include
and when you can include them over what period of time,
that's probably the biggest area
that we are finding the errors in. And
What's the accuracy rate of that one, if you remember?
Well, that gets wound up in the overall rate.
Does that make sense? So it, it doesn't, the,
the measure is the measure of across all of the payments.
Um, what we know
because of the work we've been doing is
that the errors are occurring mostly in the supplementaries,
not in the main benefit assistance.
So, and, and disability allowance is a very complicated, um,
supplement to administer. That's all I,
Yeah. Supplementary
Lauren. Yeah.
Um, I think you've raised another really interesting
point about the data.
It's probably not directly related to income support
that we're discussing at the moment,
but it actually, it's actually informing,
it sounds like it's informing a lot of the decisions
and shift in priorities for the department.
Would that be fair? You obviously got a much more
sophisticated data collection.
Well, I, I think it, it, it,
it informs a couple of things.
Um, yes, the data stuff
and Sasha can talk a little bit about that,
but what it, what it, what it allows us to do,
and this is one of the things that we've been working on
for some time to make sure that we do keep ahead
of our demand, is we, we look at, um, all of the work
that we have across the whole organization.
So increasingly we are work, we look at the work
that we have from a whole
of MSD rather than in particular service lines,
which is traditionally how we've looked at it.
So you can have one part of the organization, you know,
blow out and the work on hand be very high.
What we're trying to do is work much more
across the organization.
So George and the team, sorry,
I just wanna introduce George Van Oyen.
Um, this is Ricard in disguise.
He couldn't be here today,
so George is standing in, in for him.
Um, so what we are doing is we are
looking at the work across.
We can look at the queues, we can look at
what work is in the queues.
We can then put the right people on that work so
that we can make sure we are getting the work through.
It helps us manage, um, and keep ahead of it.
So we've had more demand.
Yet our work on hand is
what we would call within acceptable, um, standards, um,
and acceptable volumes.
Um, and that allows us
to focus a bit more on accuracy as well.
So who do we need to give the work to
because they're the ones that are skilled in, in terms
of knowing what to do with it.
Okay. In terms of data, sorry, I'll just ask,
answer the second part. Sure.
So we have two lots of, um,
and if I think about the data, we have a lot
of official statistics.
So all of our benefit numbers, we as much
as possible try to publish those.
And we have tier one statistics,
but we are also always looking at are there things
that we can in increase making them publicly
available for people?
'cause they use them for other things as well.
Um, and then we have a lot of operational data underneath
that that is helping us to understand in real time the,
the what's happening beneath those numbers, right?
That helps us to think about things like
what do we prioritize, where do we move the work to, um,
Whether we wanna make any adjustments during the day
to sort of help manage that demand as well.
So the real time aspect
of the operational data helps us make some, you know,
throughout the day decisions around
how we might manage demand
Daily. Daily
In intraday.
Yeah, we get 20,000 calls, um, a day,
a hundred thousand calls a week.
Um, you know, this is a big machine.
We do millions and millions of transactions a year.
So we need to be able to be thinking about
how we keep across all of all of those volumes.
'cause what we do know is if we get behind, we get rework,
which is where you have people coming in
and you create, you,
you create your own demand. Yeah. Okay.
Uh, supplementary, Um,
just on the disability allowance, um, that you mentioned,
Debbie, um, I'm sorry I came in late, so I'm not too sure
what the areas were that you, um,
that you were referring to.
So just keen for a little bit of clarity around that,
but also, um, most of the feedback that I receive on that is
around the fact
that it doesn't currently realistically reflect costs
that disabled people in coop.
What is your response to that?
Um, so, um, just backing up in terms
of why we were talking about disability allowance,
it was in the context of our overall accuracy rate.
And I was just explaining that our overall accuracy rate,
um, is, is improving significantly.
What we know is that we, most
of the errors are happening is not necessarily in the main
benefits, it's more in the supplementary disability
allowance was an example of that
because of the complexity of of of that particular,
um, supplementary, um, look, disability allowance,
the rate is set, um, and,
and the costs that can be, um, included in it.
A in my view, fairly broad,
but of course the rate is the rate is the rate.
So, you know, people can equal quite easily get
to the maximum and then it is the maximum.
Your question, Jamie, If I could take the committee
to employment support is that's okay, Mr.
Chair. Um, so job seeker numbers
as we know was 216,000,
but MSD, like you've done an incredible job
to place extra people into work
and I see you, you say 10,600
more placements than you did the previous year.
Uh, my question is that you
use significant funding into employment services.
So I really want to know to understand
what programs are delivering the best results.
But I also want to take it back to
where I reside is in Malborough where we've got like a lot
of horticulture, uh, we've got a lot of aquaculture, um,
and like those industries are often screaming
out for people.
How do you link into those industries
and link into those businesses?
What, what are you doing in those
areas to link those people?
Um, so, um, a lot, lots of things.
Um, we, we operate a very distributed network as, um,
members, wait, um, no, we operate at a, um, we have a lot
of, um, um, uh, discretion,
um, at a regional level for people to do exactly that,
to develop and establish relationships
with local employers or industries.
We have, um, we have about 60 million George, yeah,
$60 million that, um, is funded directly through regions
for regions to do exactly that, to um, develop programs,
whatever they might be to meet the demands
of the area and the region.
So whether that be in the horticulture sector in man,
you know, whatever the sector is.
And our regions do that every year.
So, and, and they, their,
their contracts are typically probably less long term than
they might be through our industry partnership arrangements.
And that's because we want them to be able to respond
to the local needs of communities.
So for example, if a new supermarket is being established,
we would want to go in there
and, um, uh, offer to train
or buy bespoke training programs in order to,
our clients can get the opportunities that that, that, um,
supermarket might, um, might need.
So we've got, we've got $60 million that we spend locally,
but their overall MCA is, um, is a,
is $1.1 billion.
Some of that is the staff that we use to, um,
work in the employment space.
So those are the employment case managers
that we were talking about before.
But a lot of the programs are exactly that to design, to
improve employment outcomes.
Uh, work readiness programs you've seen,
and we'll know of many of the driver's license programs
that we run across the country, the, um, relationships
that we have with mes, task force
for jobs, et cetera, et cetera.
They are all designed to equip people to be ready
for the labor market opportunities.
And they are tailored often
for exactly the regional context in which they operate in
Just a supplementary look, it's like,
I guess a ambitious goal to reduce job seeker numbers
to roughly 140,000 by 2030.
Is MSD on track with the programs
that you've got in place to do that?
Um, I, I think it's fair to say that um, the target is,
you know, probably a bit at risk
and I think, um, that's, um,
what you would expect given the economic conditions.
But what I can say is, um, we are,
we are absolutely committed to ensuring that New Zealanders
and our clients get access to jobs as they come up.
There are still jobs in the labor market
and I think proving
that we can improve our performance year on year in terms
of placing people into work as one is one, um,
factor in relation to that.
The relationships that we are having, that we have
and we are continuing to develop locally with employers
or industry is also really important.
As I say, 42% of the people
that came on a benefit last year in this country are
really highly skilled.
So being able to make sure that they get access
to jobs in the labor market is really important.
And when the economy turns,
making sure our clients are at the front of the queue
to take advantage of their economic recovery is something
that we are absolutely committed to.
Well, I've got couple so, well, sorry, can I just add,
sorry, sorry, can I go to that?
Um, just add to Debbie's point, um,
I think in the past gives us quite a lot of comfort
because you can see periods from say 2000 to the GFC
where we had a long run reduction in with the,
the unemployment benefit through sort
of a positive economic cycle.
And we've seen it post GFC not quite as dramatic,
but I think, uh, if with a positive economy
and with us doing the right things,
actually you could see a long term decline over some periods
of time and we're expecting to see that again. I think,
Um, I would just add,
'cause you did ask for some, some highlights.
So we've had some really, really good results in some
of our employment programs that you mentioned.
Our driver licensing program.
Um, we've achieved over 21,000 placements, um,
for 87% pass rate.
Um, we've had MA
and Mahi, um, where we require sort of, um, in between a 50
and 55% of people in those programs
that come from a job, job seeker benefit.
And so we achieved that in the last year as well.
Um, and our flexi wage has achieved really strong
results in that year as well.
So 76% of people, uh,
involved in those programs came from a job seeker
type assistance.
And, and all of those three programs are rated effective
in our employment effectiveness catalog.
So going Ricardo, what's the success rate
of the community coaching program?
I've got that here and I made me lose my page.
Um, somebody could find it for me.
I'll come back to you. I've got that, I've got that answer.
Oh, I've got it.
Um, so community coaching, I, um, at the end of June,
so at the end of June, um, 292, um,
people have received employment outcomes. What's
The, what, what Does that happen? 49%?
That's of the number of people that have completed the
Program of the peop 'cause it takes,
So it's up roles.
Yeah, yeah. And it doesn't count the people
who dropped off the program or the people
that are still completing the program.
Yeah. So morning.
Um, thank you. I've just gotta go, um, back
to the work readiness program.
So if you have, if you track the, um, numbers in the, um,
program, um, over time it's very lumpy.
So how do you anticipate, um, so if we have a look at, um,
24, 25,
it's up over 25,000,
but the previous year it was only 5,000.
So how do you adapt?
So you if Yeah, every year as part
of our employment investment strategy, we look at
what things we think we're gonna need for the next year
and balance out what we put into
different types of programs.
So work readiness versus employment placement type programs
and that regional basis as well.
So that will lead to some differences.
So, so for example,
if you've got a more highly skilled client base coming in,
you will spend less money on work readiness
and more money on employment outcomes if
you've worked, do you see?
So it, oh, okay. We, we adjust it depending on the clients
that we've got and,
and who we, who we are working most actively with. It
May depend where you're at at the business cycle
as well. Ary Hill,
I wanted to ask about, I've got primary I wanna ask about,
um, the issue of high skilled people.
Um, we went down to
last year we saw these very high skilled, I paid people
lose their jobs and of course they're connected to the area
because they have housing there.
So what has happened to that cohort?
Are they leaving the country?
Do you know, do you keep any stats on what's happening
to them in terms of whether they're remaining within your
system or whether they're leaving it
to move overseas, et cetera?
Um, I, I don't have the stats in relation to toura,
but what I can tell you is the way we typically work.
So we, there are labor market shocks, we will go in
and work with the employer or the union
or whoever is coordinating that work to do as much as we can
to, um, to provide other opportunities, et cetera.
Some regions, as you know,
there will be limited other opportunities within
that geographical area.
Um, at a local level.
I think we do keep an eye on
and track some of those outcomes.
So I'm happy to provide the committee
with some information, um, later. I would, we've
Got it. I would love that if I could get some
information about
what's happening in that community.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, no problem.
Thank you. I've got a couple of Ries
before I move on to new question.
Um, so what,
what progress have you made over the last financial year
towards the government's target of producing number people
unemployment benefit by 50,000?
Um, well, um, one, we would say we increased the number
of exits that we, um,
that we made into employment by 10,000.
So we've got 8,700 people into work.
We, um, we have put, um, um,
we've increased our case management numbers by, um,
from about 60,000 to 70,000, which, um, as I said
before, case management is one of the most effective
interventions that we've got.
We've managed to hold onto, um, all of the funding
that we've got to, um, to buy, um, uh,
support people into work.
We've continued to do that.
We've, um, worked really hard locally at making sure
that we are working with employers, both employers
who have been really great supporters of us
and working with our clients really effectively,
but also trying to work with employers
who typically don't know what we do
because the nature of the roles that they have.
Um, it was very be very difficult
for our clients necessarily to go straight there.
But given that that we've got a different skill base,
we've been working really hard to work
with different employers to say, Hey,
we've got really good skilled people here and, um,
and making sure that they know that we can, um, um,
you know, we can support their organizations along.
Uh, yeah, that I'll stop there probably. Yeah.
My, my other supplementary is going back to the sort
of discussion we had before about the significant funding
MSC does for employment services.
Just wondering what, uh,
work have you done over the last year
to assess which programs are working best?
So we do, we have an ongoing program of evaluation.
So anytime we've got something new, we, we, as part
of the process, we establish first monitoring
and then evaluation on that.
And so for things that have started, we've got programs
of evaluation that will start coming down the track telling
us about the evidence of effectiveness.
We also, um, through that
and the minister talked about this, we can rate, um,
we can rate 360.4 million, um, for using our,
um, propensity score matching.
And of that 94.9% of our expenditure was rated
as effective or promising.
There are some things that we can't rate using
that methodology, but we have other
methodologies to do that.
We either use evidence briefs, um, particularly from,
often from international evidence,
but also, um, things like outcomes focused evaluations
where we are not in the position yet
to see what the impacts are.
Because when a program starts, it takes quite a long time
before the outcomes are showing, showing up in the IDI
and we can start to, to be able to show Yes, that has led to
that, that has led to that.
So what it enables us to do in terms
of our evidence catalog, is that it enables us
to assess the impact on outcomes, including employment,
including income, time, on the welfare system,
justice history, um, qualifications,
and then we can assess what the impact is on a range
of outcomes, not just employment outcomes.
And so that, that's the information that you get
to over a period of time when we can start
to see the outcomes information coming
through the IDI in an anonymized way that we can look at it.
Thank you. Um, ask,
Thanks. It's
on, um, the chair's question on job seeker reduction
targets, uh, will ending job seeker payments to 18
and 19 year olds whose parents earn over 65,000 gets
you closer better.
Um, I, I I don't think that's, um, well, one,
I don't think that's the intent of the intent of the policy.
I get that. Um, I think what I would say is, um,
obviously the policy, um, um, when it, when it, you know,
when it passes through select committee
and gets introduced, um, there are numbers
that we are expecting in terms of fewer numbers of 18
and 19 year olds to get, um, uh, support
because of the tests.
So yes, I think that's about 4,000, 4,300,
I think 4,000 what we modeled.
Yeah. That's the impact. Yes.
Thank you. Chair.
We might have gone past, but I'm just
gonna track back if I can.
Oh, so, um, so it's under the equity KPI, Deb,
and specifically on Maori.
And, um, I get, what do I wanna ask about that I,
I wanna know or hear?
Um, though there's this overall improvement
or Maori a slight decrease.
So what's happening in that space?
Can you just give a bit more context to us and Yeah.
And then how we're gonna make that better? Yeah.
So that relates. So in terms of the equity KPIs,
we have nine KPIs where we can collect information
and look at it at, uh, level four disaggregated
for Mori and Pacific.
Yep. And what happened in the last year is one in
particular, which is the future alliance on benefit.
So the average 30 years average future years on
benefit went the wrong way.
And so that is, so we'd had, uh,
two years ago it was also going the wrong way.
Then last year it looked slightly better
and it's gone back up the other way.
So, at, at the moment, given the economy, that is
what you would expect, that people are more likely
to stay on benefit for a longer period of time.
And that's what's driven the increase in the equity
and the equity, KPI.
So all of our work to try
and support people to work will help
to reduce the years on benefit over time.
Are you, oh, um,
the, the wrong way thing, concept the wrong way is it's, uh,
are you confident, um, that the right-ish
or the right way it'll turn?
I mean, I, I just guess this is what I'm thinking about.
I think about, uh, you know,
and you know, what we know, uh, Debbie, um, for, from
that part of the world, and I, and,
and then I was listening to the minister's opening comments
around very individual plans and all of that.
And, and then I think about the way in which our setup is.
So yes, it is about an individual,
but that ANA is related to that, related to that,
and all of those mm-hmm.
All of those things. Understood.
And is that, might that be part of
why the wrong way might just persist?
Because, because fundamentally it might be the wrong way.
I'm not, you know,
Um, so we're, um, I mean,
what, what we know about is, um,
for Maori particularly
that show up in our statistics mm-hmm.
We've got really, um, uh, really big swings in terms of, um,
the regions, because as you know, it will be Northland,
east Coast Bay of Plenty in terms of
where the biggest population is and, and Auckland.
Mm-hmm. So where, where we've seen, in terms of the numbers
by region, which I have somewhere in, in my pack, we've seen
big, big swings in the numbers
of people on benefit in Auckland.
Um, I think Northland has gone up 4%.
Um, whereas if, if you are in Taranaki
and, um, somewhere else,
it's only gone up very small, southern, very small.
So we are also seeing the regional reality of some of this.
So we, regions have been hit hard and numbers have grown,
and we, there is a high proportion of Maori
who live in those regions.
We've seen that as well, part of, um, and young people.
So part of what we've been trying to do
through the investment strategy is make sure that, um,
young people are focused, um,
that we're focused on young people in terms
of getting them into case management.
And part of case management is understanding not only the
individual of course,
but what is impacting their inability
to either participate in training, education or employment.
And that may well take a slightly broader view in terms
of other issues that are going on.
So part of case management is my case managers every day.
Um, talk to me a lot about some of the, some of the things
that they do to help, not just the individual Yeah.
But the broader, the other things
that are impacting on those young people as an example.
Yeah. You know, we've seen, so, so first of all, we've um,
got 62% of all of Maori Pacific that are in case management,
and then we need to work, and then, you know,
we've got all the industry partnerships,
et cetera, that we are working as well.
Yeah. But the proportions have not shifted.
Yeah. It's, that's the problem.
It's also just worth noting that it's that same pattern
for all clients reflecting the economic circumstances.
Mm-hmm. It's gone the wrong way for Deb.
So we'd expect that to change
as the economy changes. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Um, and just one, I guess, um, Deb, so,
and it relates a little bit even to Jamie's question around
the, uh, industry connect, so in the pun right,
we had a big project, um,
didn't have enough plumbers decided
to grab some plumbers Oh, yes.
Put them into that program. Yeah.
And that whole circle of, um,
joined Upness Yeah.
Um, with an iwi Yes. Lead on that. Yeah.
That there, there's, there's a number
of clues in that model.
Mm-hmm. And I just thinking, gee, that's replicating that.
I mean, and that was initiated, that was a real ground up,
literally marae, iwi,
um, idea mm-hmm.
That then was supported inside the,
I might, but that's,
but that's an exact example of, um, you know, working
with our iwi partners in terms of ku.
So, yeah. Yeah. And I just do want to acknowledge you
because, um, you were part of, uh, uh, establishing some
of the work up TE KU
and now is kind of carrying on, uh, some of that legacy.
And we're doing some great work
and partnership with, um, to off the back of the social, um,
accord, which was members, uh,
a treaty settlement, um, commitment.
So, um, you know, I think the beauty of working, um,
together with Iwi and Maori service providers in particular
is that, you know, you know your whanau, uh, you got
that reach into those communities.
Um, and how can we capitalize, integrate our work programs
and also maximize the resources that we have,
not only across Crown,
but also the, where there are co-investment
opportunities with Iwi.
So we've got those models that are working such
as Tupu employment, um, up into haku now pu, um, in relation
to horticulture as well as plumbing.
So how are we taking some of those reasons?
And, uh, looking at how we can expand not only in Taito,
but in other parts of the country.
Um, just to add to that,
and it's a, it's quite different angle on Mar's point.
The, um, we we're maintaining really close relationships
with MB around the regional investment fund
and also, um,
what future investment pathway might look like.
So I think longer term we will be some production.
We've got a more predictable sense
of what's coming along and what skills are needed.
So that's a quite different angle on that,
but really important point as well, I think.
Yeah. Thank you. New question, Ricardo.
Thank you. So I'm,
I'm just asking some questions on fraud investigations
and relationship roles,
which actually cover quite a few areas
of our structured agenda.
Almost 40% of your fraud investigations do not result in
changes to entitlements.
Um, can you please outline, um, the percentage
of early interventions, facilitations
and investigations that have to do
with someone's relationship status as a total, total, um,
uh, percentage of the investigations you do?
Uh, yes. I think we have that, so, sorry.
So 22% of the, um,
investigations that we do would be
what we would call early intervention.
Is that, is that your question?
I'm asking out of the early intervention facilitation
and investigations, how many of these have to do
with someone's relationship status? Oh,
Oh, so, So predominantly,
um, relationship status is one of the most common,
um, common instances of allegations that might lead
to in a response.
Mm-hmm. Um, but what we are doing is we are not necessarily
investigating those as a matter of a formal investigation
that could lead to a criminal prosecution.
Mm-hmm. Um, so what we want to do is,
um, you know, reserve the prosecution process
for the most severe cases.
Yeah. And what we are, uh,
shifting more towards is managing a lot
of those early intervention as part
of a facilitated conversation to invite people to come in,
remind them of their obligations, um, talk to them about
what they should be doing, talk to them about,
tell me what's going on in this particular relationship.
And then we would adjust benefit entitlements going forward.
Um, so the, the exact numbers
of the relationship type we probably don't have in front
of us right now, but we could, we
Could provide those. Yeah. There's
been 207 70 6,000 inter integrity
intervention cases in the financial year we're reviewing.
That's quite a significant number. Yeah.
As part of the questions that you ask people
to ascertain whether they are in a relationship in the
status of marriage, do you ask about their
sexual intimacy activities?
And if so, why?
So there's a well, um, known process that we,
that we follow to determine whether
or not somebody is an investigator is in, um,
is in an, um, relationship.
Um, I don't have the exact questions
that are in front of me.
I'm sure we are happy to provide them.
I think in fact it's public in terms of the types
of areas that we focus.
'cause we have to determine whether there is financial
interdependence and emotional
interdependence. Those are the tests.
And finally, for recipients
of the supported living payment,
we're talking about this often disabled people
or people with quite serious health conditions.
Um, what do you think is the benefit
of making them financially dependent on their partner
and for them to lose access to their financial independence
as a result of the current relationship rules?
So, um, a as you well know, the, um,
benefit system in New Zealand has been, uh,
it's longstanding in terms of both its test in relation
to income and its test in relation to
a relationship supported living payment benefit is
no different to any others.
I ask about what's the benefit of cutting their benefit
as a result of them being deemed
to be in a relationship with the nature of marriage.
So those are the rules that currently, in terms
of the administration of the Social Security Act,
requires us to take into account not only the income
that a household has,
but the status of a relationship
to determine whether somebody's entitled
to a benefit or not.
That, that, that is, that is the,
that is the social security system.
It's been like that forever.
I know that the, um,
welfare expert advisory group many years ago raised this
question, but that work has not been taken forward
by the government or any government.
So what we've got is the current regime, which requires us
to take an income test
and a relationships test to determine eligibility.
Your Question, Prianca,
Thank you. Um, I've
got a few questions around, uh, employment
and disability specifically.
Um, I mean, you'll be aware as well
that the unemployment figure for disabled people, um,
most recent figures,
4.1% is the highest ever been since 2017.
Um, can get a sense of what work is underway specifically
to address and to improve employment outcomes, would say.
Sure. Builder. Thank you for Your question.
Uh, so firstly, we invest, um, this for some context.
We invest around 624 million, um, and employment housing
and community support services.
Uh, we also invest in disability, um, services,
but I'll get my colleague, um, haw to talk to that.
Um, that is quite a larger, uh, figure as you know.
Um, but to just give you a sense of scale of what that, um,
investment translates to.
So that is, um, results in 2,400 contracts
that we have currently in play.
Um, and we also have, I work with 1500,
just under 1500 providers, um, right across the country
that have reached into many communities.
Uh, we take a relational approach
to our commissioning procurement.
And what that means to us is that we intimately know kind
of each other's business what's going on.
Uh, we also, um, build, uh, will take a lot of time
and effort in terms of building those relationships, um,
because it is, does lead to trust and confidence.
And when you're in spaces that you are dealing with crisis
or emergencies or anything like that,
those are when those relationships really come into play.
And we saw that, um, during COVID in terms of activating
and mobilizing the community.
And we see that in other, um, uh, scenarios
that have happened, um, since, um, the pandemic.
Um, uh, what we do is we have, um, a lot
of infrastructure in place across the country.
So every region has a relationship manager and
or contracts managers.
Um, and they work closely with the sector.
Um, and the regional model is led out
by our regional commissioners
and also the regional public service leads.
So we have, uh, you know, the mechanisms in place, um,
to support, um, kind of our communities
and also our partners and providers.
We do have investment strategies. Oh, sorry, did you
Question responsibility? Thank you for the,
thank you for the overview,
but I'm just wondering if you could share with the committee
what specific programs there are focused on disability
and employment rather than the whole of community approach.
Yeah. Well, shall I, um, I can get
Not within DSS necessarily.
Oh, within employment? Oh yes, sorry.
Okay. Yes, I know. Absolutely. I can talk about that.
Um, so we have quite a lot of an investment in, um,
community participation services.
Um, you'll be very, um, um, kind of familiar, um, with this,
um, we work, um, so we have the mainstream, um, program.
We also have, um, um, support systems in, um,
in place, uh, working with, uh,
providers such as Work bridge.
Um, and they are there to work
with those people in the community who have disabilities.
In terms of supporting them into work.
Uh, we have support funds in place.
So if people need things such as um,
uh, um, technical tech solutions to be able to help them
and support those workplace solutions, then we are able to.
So with that, I've got a couple of sub, if that's alright.
Um, in terms of that particular,
and I forget the name of that support,
I know the Australian counterpart is job access,
but, um, the one here, can you tell me, can you tell us
how much, um, spent on that and
Support funds?
Yeah. The one that you just mentioned,
that if a disabled person has a job
and needs particular physical access,
has physical accessibility needs
or potentially digital, would that fund cover that?
And how well subscribed is that fund?
Uh, I'll have to come back to on,
I don't have one of the breakdown here. No.
That's feedback on the contracts that you mentioned.
Now, I've had a fair bit of feedback from,
from multiple contract holders, um,
that there have been recent changes to the contracts,
which means that many of them can only have 10%
of their clientele who are not beneficiaries,
which then means that a number of disabled people
who are not on a benefit
and want to find work cannot be supported
by those organizations.
Why is that? Is that directly related to this government's,
um, job, uh, you know, reduction targets?
Do you know which contracts they are
or who, can you give us an example of the provider or,
I don't necessarily wanna name them.
Oh, okay. Um, publicly,
but there are multiple of them who hold MSD contracts
to place disabled people into
employment who have told me this.
Okay. Okay. I can look into that.
I mean, it's not something that, um, I'm aware of,
but I can Okay.
And that's been raised to me by disabled people
who then cannot get placed into work
because of this requirement.
So if you could share some information Yes.
About the requirement, whether that's, um, correct to the,
to the committee, that would be, um,
that would be good. Thank you. Just
On that, I mean, about the, you know, privacy issues,
but would it be helpful to provide those
examples, ensure social develop,
Whatever the, whatever the member feels comfortable
About? Yeah,
It's fine. I will
check with them and if they feel
comfortable, I'll share that.
Um, but whatever you can in the
meantime, that would be good.
Final, um, SAP on this.
Is there any work, I know
that the government's made the decision
to scrap the minimum wage exemption, um, policy,
um, that we were gonna scrap.
Uh, they've reinstated that,
but is there any work going on to look at transitions from,
um, those who are, um,
employed in the businesses
that get the minimum wage exemption into open employment?
Um, we're currently looking at, um, the suite of, um,
um, support programs that are in this space.
So there's about five different programs. Mm-hmm.
Um, so we are looking at that now.
Um, we are working with, um, a local provider in terms
of helping to, um, tease things that work in,
redesign it in terms of transitions
To open Employment. Yes. Yeah.
Great. For those who can,
Yeah. Thanks.
Um, members, I'm now looking,
moving towards a community support
and structured agenda. Uh, first question,
Helen Yang.
Thank you. Um, I was at, um, the presentation
of an open to several ministers about, um, banning,
uh, homelessness, um, basically in essential
not being able to sleep on the street.
Um, what I wanna know from you is, have you been doing work
on what MSD would do in
response to such a ban
or what the implications would be from the point of view
of your department of such a ban?
Um, So, um, as I understand it, um,
there, there is a, there is a process
and, um, you know, no decision has been made in relation to
that, so I can't really comment on that
because it's under active consideration.
So what I can tell you is what we are doing in relation
to both, um, um, the work that we do, um, in communities
and what providers for people who are rough sleeping, um,
and the way in which we work with them.
And I can, um, Karen, Karen Hawking, um,
runs our housing area, um, so she can respond to some
of the practical things that we are doing, both in response
to, um, um, rough sleepers
and generally how we work with, um, with people.
Can can I ask you to be specific about the Auckland City?
Sure. Thank you. Yes.
Thanks for your question. Uh, so we are working, um, uh,
really closely with a number
of providers in the Auckland CBD
who support those that are sleeping rough.
Uh, we heard from those providers at times that, um, people
were sleeping rough, finding our services
difficult to access.
So we've pivoted a number of staff to ensure that, uh, those
that need, um, an assessment both for financial assistance
or housing assistance, uh, get, uh, access to our services
in Auckland, across Auckland.
Um, we've seen about 150 people
that provide us a food to us.
And, um, a number of those in this are in the CBD.
About a third of them were sleeping rough.
Uh, we've been able to, um,
support some people into emergency housing.
Other people have gone into transitional housing
and also, uh, into the, uh, housing first places. So, can I
Follow, sorry, sorry.
Can I, um, we've just had a report released
by Kickback mm-hmm.
Saying that they're seeing I think a hundred young people.
Um, can you tell me, are they correct in their assumptions?
Is that consistent with what you are seeing at,
do you know about those people?
And what discussions are you having with Kickback about
what support those young people need?
Absolutely. Look, I talk to Aaron regularly
and, um, in fact, I was talking to him yesterday.
Um, and, and I mean,
and I think that's the way that we work at MSD,
our staff are, um, you know, they, they,
Aaron has access at a national level,
but also our regional staff worked really closely with them.
Um, at just this week, Aaron had raised a, a, a couple
of young people, um,
and we were able to work with them
to get a short term solution
before they went into some more, um, stable housing.
And I think it's really difficult to, um,
uh, define them, you know, accurately, um, define the number
of people that are serving rough,
and we can only talk to you about the, we see.
But, um, alongside the work that Aaron does, we've got, uh,
a, a youth service, uh, our youth service, um,
work really closely with youth coaches.
So, uh, we work
with people actually all at youth all over the country
and where we can, we are, um, supporting those youth into,
um, specialist transitional housing providers.
But we do know that there is work to be done
to support young people,
Another cohort that really worry me, uh, uh,
women on their own in their, um, later life.
Um, and I see those people on our streets including, um,
but I am concerned
that they also miss out on things like women's refuges
because they might not have children that attend anymore.
So they're constantly missing out and being turned away.
Mm-hmm. Can you tell me what you do to reach out
to that group?
And I know this is sort of double barrel question,
but I'm also concerned about the place
that people feel homed.
So often it is the central city.
Are those services going to be
provided in the central city on an ongoing basis,
even if there is a ban on rough sleeping in that area?
Because that's the place where people feel comfortable.
Thank you. And, um, we've, again, work closely
with people like, and,
and a lot of people that are involved in, um, you know, um,
advocating for, for women in their homeless.
And look, emergency housing is still available.
Uh, we don't contract emergency housing.
It's, um, uh, supply, but we are, anybody presents to us
or through our outreach services, we will look to support
some solutions for them.
Um, we are supporting, um, many women with emergency housing
and, uh, also, um, with public housing
and, uh, I think, uh, in transitional housing.
And we are one of the things that we are doing
with our support services, um, and our housing brokers
and our case managers, is looking at all alternatives, um,
for people to try and get into some form
of housing solution.
So yes, recognize that, um, women are, uh,
struggling with some of their housing needs, but we've Yeah.
Are actively working with them.
Sorry, the other part of my question was about the place
that, that tends to be the central city
and Auckland's, not always,
but are you committed
to providing those services in the place
that psychologically people feel safe in?
I've got this, the family violence portfolio,
so I'm particularly interested in that kind of worry.
Yeah, look, I think we've got a good, um,
nationally we've got a good, um, uh, you know,
a really reasonable amount of, um, supply,
community supply available.
So we work with, um, Molia,
we provide financial assistance for people.
We are the organization that contracts, uh,
transitional housing or housing first.
But I do know, um, talking about in Auckland City,
there are, um, Auckland City Mission, Kawi, Kaha, a number
of providers, um, provide transitional housing
and housing first in Newland City region.
And we've certainly got, um, availability
of commercial supply. But
To, but to answer your point, yes.
So for the services
and navigators that we have put in place off the back
of this issue, we have contracted them through
to the end of June next year.
So we've, they will be in place for, for us for to June you
Until June, Well, for the extra ones that we've put in,
so we already have a whole lot of navigators, as an example,
we've put an extra 14 in in the places, um,
I think the five, five different locations, Auckland,
CBD being one, they're in place till June next year. And
I'll continue, I have a supplement on this actually, just,
just going, going back into some of my own work history,
this work in the other alcohol
and drug treatment court in the Auckland District
Court a number of years ago.
And, uh, just recalling, um,
what I saw there was often there was a complexity
of issues going on for people who are living rough,
that often entailed, um, them appearing repeatedly in front
of the o other, other pretty important sort
of a multi-agency response to try
and address the multiple complexities
that were driving their behaviors.
And, and often, uh, they would leave accommodation
and go back on the street, um,
because, you know, safe well, like where,
where they feel more comfortable freezing.
Um, and I, it takes a while to work through the,
this, it's a bit challenging.
Just interested in the, in the work that you are doing, um,
in that environment with those
addressing this multiple complexities
and some of the people who are presenting in the space.
Thank you. You're, and you are, you are. Right.
Um, there are often multiple complexities.
Our staff are often, um, working with, uh, providers, um,
and our clients over long periods.
In fact, we were talking about a gentleman yesterday in,
uh, in the, about plenty.
And, um, he's been, um,
sleeping rough almost, uh, two decades.
Didn't want to, um, engage with us even, um,
even though he is eligible for superannuation
and, uh, it, it's taken quite some time,
but that man is now in a home.
He's now getting his benefit.
And, um, we're continuing to work with,
with him in the support services.
So I think
that's something I really wanna acknowledge, um, our staff.
Um, and certainly we really appreciate the providers
that we work with because, um, you, it is tough for people
and there are times, um, where they're not, um,
quite ready to, um, engage fully in the services
that we have available.
And we also agree, um, particularly with our youth, uh,
providers that often in emergency housing,
motel isn't the best solution.
Um, working with them around some
of the other options available, uh,
is, is a better solution.
Thank you. This is some community work experience,
and I guess not financial sanctions more broadly,
because a lot of these end
up engaging with community groups.
Um, how many non-financial sanctions,
including community work experience have you applied so far?
Um, very few. I think we're about a dozen. Yep.
The minister often talked about
that this was a better alterna well, an alternative
to financial sanctions and a better one according to her.
Why is it that you've only applied 12
and financial sanctions have remained the majority, the,
well, almost probably 99%
of the sanctions that are being applied.
Is it because community groups just simply don't, um,
support community work
experience? Or what are the barriers?
Um, first of all, I think you need to understand
that the people who, um, sorry, there are,
there are particular criteria as to
who can access the non-financial sanctions, right?
So you, um, have to be in case management,
you have to have dependent children.
You have to have your first obligation fail
and attend an appointment with a case manager.
It can only be considered if it's within
that five day notice period.
So it significantly reduces the size of people
where those sorts of sanctions will apply.
Um, in relation to community work, it has
to be the right thing for the individual,
and it has to be community work that is available.
So some locations that may not be appropriate.
So it, I don't think we ever envisage it to be, you know,
for, for everybody given that criteria,
it's a significantly smaller,
it's a significantly small group of people
that will be eligible for the non-financial sanction,
but they are an alternative to financial sanctions.
And the same with money management.
If already your housing costs, for example,
or more than 50%, you wouldn't apply it.
So it's a tool that we can use for the right circumstances.
So, um, it's, it's, you know, that's what we've done today.
We will continue to apply those for the people
who it's eligible and for who it's Right.
If only 12 people have been, uh,
given a non-financial sanction, does that say
that the circumstances are almost never right?
No. Compared to the thousands
of people say, say we just starting.
And so are you finally, are you intending
to use non-financial sanctions as an actual replacement
to financial sanctions?
I think, I think the policy intent was always to, for it
to be another tool in the toolbox for people
where a financial sanction might not be the right thing.
And this is an alternative.
And I think if, as I explained,
if you think about the people, that, that applies
to a particular group of a cohort.
And so it is another tool, it is an alternative
to a financial extens.
And, you know, we've only just started finally,
Just, um, have you received any feedback from community
organizations around the risks of them taking people,
um, as part of the community work experience,
non financial students in terms of the tasks
that have been proposed, um,
to the community organizations health and safety?
What concerns have you received from community organizations
in relationship to those non-financial
Sections? I'm not aware
of any. That
doesn't mean to say there hasn't been.
Do you, are you aware of any? We can ask and let you know.
Um, but certainly in terms of the policy design,
that appropriateness was always an issue in terms,
you wanna make sure that
ization being sort of landed with a volunteer
who doesn't wanna be there and it's gonna be a problem.
So it was always a consideration, I think goes to the,
these patients relatively no numbers on it as well.
Are you gonna report your non-financial sanctions
and your m ms D quarterly data going forward?
I, I believe so. I mean, okay. Alright.
Can, Can you, I mean, yeah.
Can you remind the committee, um,
how long financial sanctions were the only option available?
Pardon? Can you remind the committee
They've only just started in the
last six months, isn't that right? Yeah.
So not that's non-financial sanctions. Yeah.
How long financial sanctions were the only option available?
Oh, um, Financial sanctions effectively go back
to 1938 in one way or another.
Um, and so
I need just stop there.
Um, they were able to implement thousands of financial
Sanctions In six months.
So,
So there are Least continue.
Um, there are a couple
of other sanctions which are available
in particular circumstances.
So there are, um, drug testing sanctions that apply
to some people, and there's warrants to arrest,
which are tied to the, um, criminal justice process.
But the financial sanctions are basically a
long running part of the system.
And the non-functional ones have just come
and some of 'em, a couple of 'em just
during the last month or so.
So, so the point being that, uh,
non-financial sanctions are now a new tool available
to the department, is that correct?
Yes. And, uh, if, if I understood the, the first part
of your presentation is, uh, 1% of beneficiaries, uh,
in regional, I are not compliant after reminders.
Um, so it's very, very small cohort usually,
and probably stay in that status
for a very short time as well.
Mm. Thank you. Uh, supplementary?
I was, yes. I, um, what are this, I mean, I'm curious
for good reason, the, what are those circumstances?
Like, what, what makes up that, um, the 12?
Like what are the circumstances that are present for
that? Not, yeah.
Uh, I wouldn't, um, you know, I wouldn't have the exact
scenarios in front of me, but, so if these are for people
who are in case management, there are people
who are in case management, they have to penetrate,
it's their first, it's their first obligation failure.
Um, they've contacted us within that period.
Our case managers would have a conversation with them about
the, um, um, you know, what would work for them.
And there will be, there will be guidance
and criteria that they will have.
We, I mean, we can give you some, you know, anonymized,
here's the scenario A and scenario B, if that's helpful.
I just wouldn't, I just don't have that,
um, in front of me today. Sorry. That's
Fine. Just
before we move on to the next, um, subject area,
just, just, um, if you could just tell us about, uh,
what improvements CM SD seen in regional, um,
partnerships over the last year in terms of,
you know, um, community support,
Community support.
Um, I think that's
Just,
um,
Yeah. Um, I
think I just, um,
provided a little bit of, um, context
before, um, just around
how we've got our infrastructure set up across the country.
Um, we, uh, um, we've got 624 million that we invest,
um, in community through employ, uh,
community support services as well as housing, uh, programs.
Uh, I think, um, you know, like we even,
we've got this continuous loop that we have
around investment strategies, purchasing plans, um,
you know, what is the data telling us?
So we make sure that we can, uh, contribute to the outcomes
that, um, work the most
and the interventions that work the most.
Um, and over, um, the last few years, I,
I've talked about relational commissioning, um,
but that is a social sector commissioning principle, um,
that we, I, I guess we put a lot of effort into,
because I said, you know, having those trusted relationships
with people, we are able to adapt
and be agile depending on what those community needs are.
Um, part of those commissioning principles as well.
We've put in longer term contracts, um, with some of our,
um, providers and partners.
Um, we've also put in place clearer funding models, um,
and we are also looking at consolidation, um, of contracts.
Uh, and Debbie mentioned it in her opening, um, remarks
that, uh, we've just recently as part of the MC services
for the future, um, updated our contracting system,
so, and reporting system.
So they were based in several different areas.
Um, we have,
we just on the 24th of November did the final migration,
which was around 600, uh, 6,000, um, contracts to a value.
I think it was about, um, well, it was a large value.
Uh, and now we have one place, um,
that not only our partners and providers can go to,
but also, uh, we can go to as MSC staff,
it simplifies a process.
There's a faster matching of invoicing
and purchase orders, which means our partners
and providers get their money earlier and on time.
But this is the kicker,
and I know it sounds really simple, um,
but we can do electronic signatures now.
So after years of signing 2,400 contracts
manually, um, that is a real blessing.
So, um, we've made some significant changes. Yeah. Thank
You. That, that sounds really promising.
Can, can you give us sort of an example of
how this has improved outcomes?
Yeah, sure. Um, so, um, uh, just I think, um,
George talked a little bit about, um, some of the, uh,
programs that have got high participation rates, um,
but also, uh, effective.
So you'll see as part of our continuous loop that we have,
um, uh, we publish kind of what's, uh, programs
and interventions are effective.
Um, so the ones that, uh, that come to mind for me, uh,
things like Hippo, which really worked well for young, um,
young people as well as for Maori.
Um, man Mahi
and flexi wage is another, um, product that really has, um,
a high, um, pun of effective, um, rate.
So
Just, just on that actually, just thinking that, you know,
the Maori economy is, is obviously doing very strongly,
is outperforming the general economy, actually.
Um, just interested in how these relationships are,
are working to, um, you know, upskill and,
and intersect with that
Yeah. Economy.
Yeah,
and I touched on that, um, a little bit before.
Um, no MSD is, um, we have, um, strengthened
and continue to strengthen our relationships with Iwi
and Maori Super Brothers providing right across the country.
Uh, and we, um, are the lead for three social accords.
Um, so the KU iwi, um, social Accord, la
and also the, which is, um, so through those,
um, through that work, we, we basically,
we call it wrangling, but we wrangle together all the other
agencies to see what, um, our mutual kind of priorities are.
We re really need to understand kind of the aims
and aspirations of iwi in particular,
and how they want to work.
It's interesting, nine times outta 10, there is mutual, um,
connection here in terms of those priorities,
but it's the, how we get there is really important for us
to kind of understand and, um, kind of work with, uh,
'cause as I said
before, uh, iwi know their whanau inside out
and they have reach into those communities that are out.
Some of our public service organizations will never be able
to, um, to get, so we have to work in partnership if we want
to get some of those greater, um, outcomes. Uh,
I know, I would just add, if we think about Taku
as an example, very, very interested at different models
to make sure that young people get not only work,
but um, you know, um, apprenticeships.
Um, same with the work that we are doing
with China t they're very much thinking about it from an
economic point of view
and how, you know,
their significant end economic base can be leveraged
to make sure there other people get into employment.
So there are great synergies between the work
and the objectives that we've all got.
So, Yes.
Um, the, so the connection from,
and just carrying on with this one, um, with our family
that live in cities and that urban, you know, that if to use
that phrase, you know, from, um, how do we, or do we,
or how is there any thinking
or development around how we make those connections so
that wherever you live, you, you know,
you take your Mara with you Mm.
And take your with those things.
I, I don't know, I'm just Yes.
Anything in there that you might
Wanna, to be honest, probably not so much.
I mean, we, we, um, other than our partnerships
with the ibi, you know, who, who have an interest in doing
that, but, um,
but um, yeah, so probably not a, that's not a specific
strategy or approach that we take un unfortunately,
but like I say, the, um, the IBI that we do work with have
that very strong focus in terms of both the, um, the people
that live within the roki, but how they get reach
More broadly. Yeah.
And I also think for ku, um, you know,
it's not only about the KU wau,
it's about all Maori living in that area
and all wau, you know, regardless of
what, um, race they are.
Yes. But how can we lift, um, the economic
and social, um, kind of prosperity. So,
Supplementary Follow up, um,
my question is really just the sub to Marianos in that, um,
uh, accessibility to the support services, um,
community support services
and the knowledge of, um, situations like this happening.
Um, the, does that affect accessibility?
Does the, do people, uh, get to know, uh,
that there are opportunities like this that are being built
around them?
Uh, and considering the fact
that accessibility targets have been met and exceeded, uh,
however, there's been a reduction from 2324, um,
what do you attribute that reduction from 2324
to this year
and, um, meaning accessibility from, uh,
the public onto your, um, community support programs?
Um, I can talk should be going. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You know, um, I think hopefully I'm going to answer, um,
this correctly, but just please let
me know if I'm off track.
Um, but we've had a,
we have had a reduction in the community MCA, um, it has,
it's around the 30 million, um,
dollar mark from year to year.
The majority of that is
because of time limited funding that has come to an end.
So we've had, um, the resilience
and organized, um, um, crime and communities.
Um, that funding was around 12 million that came to an end.
Um, and then also we've had funding
and the community connectors.
So the community connectors were that we stood up, uh,
in response to COVID
and also the North Island weather events.
Uh, and it is a model that you can use when any
of those emergency situations take place.
We've got all the lessons there
so we can stand it up again if we need to.
Um, but that has been the, where the areas
of reduction have been.
Um, there still continues to be good accessibility, uh, to,
uh, services that are out there in the community.
Um, we do have,
and we've always had for review, long time, uh, family
and community support services directory, uh,
which people can access fine information.
Okay. But also we've got other, um,
mechanisms in community advocates, uh, citizens
of vice bureau, even our frontline staff
who know all the services that are in our community.
So if they feel, uh, if they, um, uh, in need
of something our people know where to refer them to.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Alright, members, um, we're now gonna move on to the next,
uh, subject area, now structured unit, which is,
uh, disability sports services.
Primary question. I do indeed wait for the change.
Yeah, I dunno. I can stay here.
For those of you who don't know, this is Ann. Sure.
Who leads disability support services out of MSD, um,
Justine and our
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, I've got, it'll be no surprise,
this is a new area that's moved into
DI have great interest in this.
I've got a few questions around budgets
and, um, that side of things,
plus some questions straight from your, um,
annual report on the areas that haven't been achieved, um,
and some questions around that.
Plus the tool, the DSCs funding, uh, tool
that's been worked on as well.
Appreciating that you won't be able to go into detail
of the tool, so I won't be asking you for, for that.
Um, in terms of the budgets that have been allocated
to nests, um, currently being allocated in nas, nas,
can you outline how those are calculated?
Certainly we can, uh, do that for you.
I think, um, it's useful to start off with context
and say that actually we've had a huge amount
of investment into our disability support, um, funding
for the last couple of years.
We had $1.1 billion last year and,
and another billion dollars this year.
That's allowed us to increase NASS budgets, uh, by 14%.
Largely at the moment, our budgets are based up
and NASS make a determination when a person is assessed
and eligible for disability services, they then determine
what are the right services for that person,
whether it's residential, whether it's home
and care services through a home and care provider,
or whether it's flexible funding
and whether that might, uh, meet their needs best.
So that's a decision for the nas.
How we make up the funding, which I think is your question,
uh, is largely based on, um, the amount
that NASA's spending
and what, uh, we, um, have been lucky enough to, uh,
put into an increase in demand
and into, um, some small amounts
for price up plus for our providers.
So we are moving to a funding distribution model,
and that's something that we are actively looking at.
And, um, my colleague Alistair Hill will be able to talk
to you a bit about that work as he's leading that right now.
So that's hot off the press.
Sorry, just to clarify before, so
that is based on actual spend by NASS over a period of time,
Actual spend plus an increase when we, when, when we, uh,
able to persuade, uh, the government
through budget processes to increase based on demand.
So we do clearly watch what's going on in
that demand coming in the door from NAS as well.
I, I should note as well that the, the, the budgets, um,
are adjusted for populations.
So, um, people do move
around the country for various reasons.
Um, that's particularly important for NASS,
where you've got people with high value, uh, packages
that might move, you know, those can be in the hundreds
of thousands of dollars a year.
And so we do make some adjustment for those as well.
So can I then ask why NASS are saying that
for the first time ever, they have wait lists?
If it's based on actual demand plus
budgetary increase since been
Certainly last year, uh, when ministers, uh, responded
to the independent review that was put in place,
and that was when, uh, DSS transferred it into NSD.
We did put in place budgets, uh, for nas.
Clearly, uh, we had, um,
DSS had breached its appropriation nine out
of the last 10 years.
Uh, so it was important to get some good fiscal control,
ensure that we have a sustainable system
so we can best meet the needs
of those disabled New Zealanders that require our services.
Uh, in doing that
and putting in place those, uh, budgets last year,
we were able to give, uh, the government confidence, uh,
in our spend levels and
that we could more accurately forecast,
which has unlocked further funding for us.
I can't speak to what you are hearing from nas.
What I can say is
that we have increased those budgets 14% this year,
and, uh, we know that nscs are doing their best to ensure
that they can support everyone coming through their doors.
Surely you've heard though the significant amount
of feedback from disabled people
who have experienced a reduction in, in support over
that period of time of transition.
Um, has, uh, the department, has the ministry done any work
to collate the feedback
or numbers of people who have lost support during that time
or had their support reduced, including those
who couldn't enter residential care facilities, uh,
when the freeze was put in place?
Put, certainly I might answer the residential, uh, piece,
which I'm more familiar with,
and then hand to al on on the rest of that.
Uh, to answer the member's question on residential, uh,
you'll be aware that the government did put in place a
residential freeze on funding.
It's important to note that that wasn't a freeze on
placement into residential care
because every day
of the week we have people both exiting care
and entering care.
So we still saw people entering care.
We did ask, uh, NAS
to prioritize those in particular circumstances.
Those leaving Tariq care forensic providers
hospital exits over
and above those that could potentially wait a little longer
for, uh, community placements.
Um, we were really pleased to be able
to finish the residential pricing tool work, uh,
and get an increased investment of $60 million on every year
for residential funding.
That meant that that 14% increase includes an ability,
and we have seen, um,
an increasing numbers coming into residential care, uh,
from July this year when the freeze ended on funding
and, uh, masks had their new budgets for the year.
So I actually had a separate line
of requesting on residential,
but since we're into the,
we there now, I'll just go with that.
So, I mean, I'm familiar with the government's line
that there was a funding freeze,
but no freeze on new entrants.
I also have the document that was sent to, um, nas. Sure.
Um, that talks in great detail about the prioritization Yes.
Of new entrants that you've alluded to there.
I've heard from numerous families who have said
that they've been waiting for about five years
to get their adult disabled child into a
residential care facility.
And once that announcement
and the guidelines were sent out, the wait lists
and the, uh, spaces
that had been negotiated disappeared overnight.
So I am struggling to reconcile what you are saying
that there was no, um, uh, impact on new entrants
as a result of the prioritization by this government
with what's happening on the ground.
Mm-hmm. How do you reconcile that?
What I would say is last year when those new budgets came
in, the nss, uh, were working out how they were going
to work through and prioritize people. Yeah. People
Were given guidelines To do that.
Yeah, yeah. No, absolutely.
Uh, what they were, what they were doing then, uh, was
for a point in time while we were working through
that residential, um, pricing tool,
that work was done earlier this year.
Ministers announced increases in funding
from the 1st of July.
Yes. And so we still, we can,
we still have people entering here and we still,
and we have more people entering here from the feas of July.
Thank you. Has the guidance to NASS on those specifics,
so those in priority for entries to those subject
to court orders, those, um, exiting care
hospital care, have, you know, that that list
of prioritization, very specific that was sent
to nass, has that been lifted?
We always expect our NAS to prioritize those
that are in high priority.
Those are particularly
of those categories that stays in place.
But we are confident that NASS have the money to be able
to look at options for anyone coming in the door
that they're assessing that needs access
to residential care.
They're also working through
and being able to support a large amount of people
to have more choice in the community.
And we saw community care packages go up
Last up on this Last year,
Last up on this.
Um, on that note, one of the, um, biggest issues
that's raised with me is the need for alternatives
to residential care.
Um, I asked, uh,
FHA on Monday whether the program they were working on my
home, my choice which would provide those
alternatives is continuing.
They said it's been transferred to MED
and to ask you, so I'm asking you the same question.
Uh, has that been transferred
and is work continuing on my home?
My choice and alternatives to residential care?
Certainly. Uh, my home, my choice was a program that was,
uh, in place at Phi Kaha.
What we've been focusing on is stabilizing the system,
responding to the independent, uh, review recommendations,
which has been a huge amount of work.
And in that ensuring that we are actually making, uh,
choices available for people.
The member's probably aware, I'm sure that many
of our services haven't been commissioned
for years, if not decades.
And so there's a lot of work we need to do to ensure
that we do have greater choice for people entering, uh,
and being assessed by Nasc wherever they want to live.
So we, we have flexible funding options,
we have choice in community living,
we have supported living.
I'm really confident there are a range of great options
for people to be able to support them
in where they want to be. But
My whole, my choice as a work program has not con
continued, continued under d
That has been on hold while we've been doing
undertaking the Independent review.
Thank you. Your question, Laura? Thank,
Oh, sorry, what Did you say? Laura? Laura,
Thank you Mr. Chair. And
thank you for coming on, um,
because there has been quite a lot of disruption
and change, um, for those receiving the support.
Um, I'm wondering if you could let me know what, um,
SD has done to help people navigate these changes in their,
in their families as well.
Because I do hear from people that come to me with concerns.
A lot of it is like the changing,
continuing back and forward, different services available
and they just realistically, like I'm a member of Parliament
and I'm helping them navigate the system.
So if you could tell me what, um,
you've been doing, what, what you've put,
Certainly I might hand over
to Alistair Hill who's been leading out on the community
consultation and listening to
what our communities have been telling us.
Sure. Um, in the last year, we've run two rounds
of community consultation.
Um, the, the first was really to understand the issues
that people were experiencing with the system,
and that was really heavily weighted towards, uh,
the changes that came in place in 2024.
Mm-hmm. We know that
that was really disruptive for the community.
And, um, they, they told us loud
and clear that what they want more than anything is
certainty, choice, and control.
Those are the three things that they, they need
to feel like the ground isn't shifting beneath them.
Um, when we went to further consultation earlier this year,
um, we heard from I think over 2 2600 people
who participated in that around what options
or what choices, um, they would, they would prefer
to see within the system that would give them that
that choice and control back
and an understanding of how to best make that work.
Within the, um, the, the system that we've got, um,
we've been working with the, the NASS
and, uh, our if f host providers, uh, to make sure
that we've got good streams of communication going out.
We've set up regular community
and provider updates as well to ensure
that we're getting a regular stream
of communication out to community.
Um, one of the areas that I think, um,
more work still can be done as in,
in the information in an advisory space around
how people navigate this.
Mm-hmm. Because we know that, uh, DSS is just one part
of every big system that disabled people,
uh, have to navigate.
So being clear about the services that we offer,
the supports that are available through,
that's really important to us.
The, the changes that we're bringing in place next year,
which have been communicated and,
and announced by the government,
I think we'll go a step further in that.
The, the key thing that
that's gonna bring about is national consistency.
At the moment we have, um, I think 15 NASS
around the country, three EGL sites.
Um, each of those operate within their own region
and they operate to different structures, processes,
systems, um, assessment tools as well.
And so bringing a national level of consistency
and alignment to that is a
really critical part of our program
And Great. Thank you so
much. Uh, just to follow on from that, um,
I'm down in Christchurch, so I have quite a bit, um, to do
with Aspire Canterbury
and I know that they are contracted
to receive so many hours.
I think it's about 10 hours, I might be wrong, um,
with individuals helping them navigate the system
and I find that to be really successful.
Wondering if there's been any thought around expanding that
to other areas in the country or,
or something along those lines.
Similar. Um, because they don't just cover like MSD support,
they do like what else is in the community.
That's, and they, they really take that whole package.
So I'd just like to, uh, jump in here, uh, as we, uh,
finish consolidating on the gains that we've made
and stabilizing the system.
One of the key areas that keeps consistently coming up is
this issue of navigation,
particularly across other agencies.
Mm. Not necessarily within the DSC supports, but Yeah.
How do they know what else they're entitled to?
So this is something that we are turning our minds to now.
Um, that will be a piece of work
that we really will be focusing on is
how do we work not only within DSS
and understanding those systems,
make sure we've got accurate and clear information.
We'll be working with, uh,
and their system role around those broader system
and knowledge and information
that they will be bringing together,
but equally with the other,
other agencies delivering funding
and support, including wider MSD education,
health, ot.
And what we want to do is understand how that's working.
We actually, it's not working that well. Yeah.
Uh, and what we can do to improve that.
And then we'll look to the models that are available to say
how we might be able to effectively consider options.
And then we'll put that through
for government decisions in due course.
But that's a big, big piece of work as we navigate
through all of the different settings, um,
and understand what is out there
and how we can best facilitate people
to get their way through the system.
Um, so when do you think that we will be able
to see some progress on that?
So this time next year, could we ask you, have you
provided that advice back to the ministers?
Um, like what is your expectation?
Do you have a timeline for this piece of work?
Uh, we are still planning that out
and understanding the nature of, uh,
what's going on in the sector, in the system.
We are also still focused on finalizing
and consolidating on the gains that we have made
and responding to the independent review.
There will be a program of work,
we will be kicking it off in the new year in terms
of looking at the system
and understanding how it could be improved.
Mm-hmm. How policy settings
and operational settings can continue to be improved beyond
what we have done to address the independent review.
I do not have an exact timeframe on all that work,
but it isn't indeed a priority
because it comes through consistently to us as a key issue.
And if people can understand what their entitlements are
and can access those, it's, it's really effective for them
to get on and, and get their needs met.
So we think we see this as a really key piece
of work would definitely be undertaken
and started next year.
But I don't have a timeframe yet set as we work that through
Supplementing.
That's just on the point around the, uh,
national consistency that you mentioned, Alistair,
that I'm assuming is the tool that is, um, being worked on.
Um, is the tool being, as it's being developed now,
is it being co-designed with disabled people
nests and EGL sites?
I, I think it's really important to be clear
about the language.
Um, we're not co-designing.
What we are doing is we're taking, um, the existing tools,
uh, that have been developed over time, either
through the NASS, but also within those EGL regions,
the EGL sites, um, enabling good life sites,
and, uh, implemented a different process
and kind of approach to working with individuals.
And what we heard through community consultation is that
for those in the nasc regions,
assessments really deficit based can
be a really negative process.
There's no transparency.
The EGL sites have a different approach
that particularly allows disabled people
to tell their story in, in the way that works for them.
Uh, and it looks through those different life stages
and, uh, talks to 'em about, uh, them in the hole. I'm
Familiar with The site, so we, I
just wanna know what the tool Yeah.
So we, we are, we are taking, we're taking basically the,
the, the process and the tool that they use.
And we're building on that
to create a nationally consistent tool that we know, um, uh,
has worked well for people in those EGL regions
and that NASS can work with as well.
'cause it does change the approach for them in the way
that they, they, they talk to and engage with stable people.
Is it true that EGL sets were given nine days to choose
to decide whether they move to the new approach,
which would remove, uh, purchasing guidelines
and have the new tool, um,
or to stay with the current approach?
No, not quite. No. So when we went out for consultation
that was deliberately focused around the NASC regions,
that was what the independent
review said we were to focus on.
Um, the findings that we got from that consultation
and the recommendations we made were inherently focused on
the settings we needed to make the
nasc regions more consistent.
So, um, we didn't feel we had the, the mandate
to change the way that the EGL sites and processes operated.
Those are a community led kind of, uh, initiative.
So we did go and ask them, um, whether
or not they would be up for a conversation about
how they would come on board, um, that wasn't requiring them
to, uh, take on board everything strictly,
but we wanted to work with them to understand what sort
of changes would be needed to make that work.
We did put some, uh, uh, when we, when we went to 'EM
and asked, we, we did say we need
to hear back reasonably soon about whether
or not they wanted, what
Timeframe did you give them? Uh,
I, I can't remember. But we also, you
Provide that to the Committee. Yeah.
We're happy to provide the correspondence.
We also heard from some of the, the, um, the, um,
leadership groups that they needed in an extension
to be able to consult with their
community, which we supported.
We helped them with, um, participating with those, uh,
in those community conversations as well.
We also said to them that we really needed
to steer if they were gonna come in so that we had time
to make the changes and implement the systems and settings.
It wasn't a requirement that they, they come in
and then absolutely stay.
There was always an opt out at a later stage.
Um, I'm really pleased that all three regions having run
their processes have opted in.
'cause it means that we will get national consistency from
next year, which is the first time
that we've had that within DSS.
Any question, Al?
Yay. Thank you. Um, so I wanna, uh, hear from you.
I'm gonna ask about outcomes
and outcomes specific to Tanga Maori
and then, um, some around site budgets, nas, ELG.
So, so what outcomes have been delivered for Tanga
Maori and how do NAS and EGL site budgets
and performance frameworks affect Maori priorities?
I can talk a little bit to the, to the budgets.
Um, and I think the, the,
the outcomes, I think flow from that.
Um, we know that for Maori, um, within DSS,
around 23%, I think of our population DSS population, um,
uh, identify as Maori, um,
slightly higher than the population level,
but that's around about the same level as those
that identify as disabled within the Maori population.
Um, that said, what we heard through consultation is that,
um, Maori, um, like awareness of what DSS is
or how to access it, um, the systems processes.
And in some cases, the organizations
that support them don't have the cultural competency to, um,
to deal with them in their place, in their, um,
in their location and,
and with their culture and their whanau.
And so, um, that's something that we are looking at
how we work with the, the, the NASS
and agencies to, to build that, um,
workforce competency over time.
Um, in terms of the way the budgets are set, um,
the budgets have been set based on, as, as Anne said,
historic actual spend, um,
and adjusted for that expenditure over time, along with,
you know, some changes for how the population shifts.
Um, that is kind of, uh, it is what it has always been.
And so we know that we need to do some work to try
and understand what a population based model might look like
and how that would inform funding going forward.
Um, we know that in places like, um, you talked about, uh,
earlier, um, t is another area where we know that there are,
uh, service gaps.
And so, uh, the, the regions, um,
potentially get less funding
because there is less funding,
less money to spend on services.
And because there are fewer services, there's less funding.
So those are things that we need to address
through our commissioning and also through our approach to,
um, to, to funding for individuals
and for NSCS going forward.
On the outcomes point, I would also say to the member,
we need to do better in that space.
So we are developing up a data strategy
and looking at outcomes for Maori and Pacific communities
and understanding more about that
because we don't actually have a lot of good quality
information, particularly from those Tang Kaha
that are using our services.
We really need to invest in improving that data
and information so we know exactly where we are
and what outcomes, uh, we are.
Yeah. Whether they're, whether they're the outcomes
that those Tang Kaha asking for
Your, your opening openingly.
Um, Maori don't have,
or aren't familiar, I'm not George,
which line, something like that.
Which is, which is probably the biggest concern.
'cause it's not like, um, they haven't accessed
or having had to access the service.
'cause I obviously, you know, back in my work life, um,
and the word NAS was like everyone knew it.
It wasn't always said in the nicest way.
Um, and, and that's,
and particularly formal Maori,
so it's not like it hasn't been known.
What is obvious is that it's been consistently ignored.
So when you say that in 2025, that just winds me up,
you know, not personally,
but the response is so late, you know, and it's,
and so again, Maori in that churn, you know, so it's,
um, it's an urgent thing.
This is, and I get it from the likes of pad poor
and others that are, that are constantly going mental,
this has been such an longstanding unmet need.
Why are we still having to wait? So, so I, I hear you.
I'm irritated by the response, but I understand
because at least it's the truth.
These things have been ignored for too long.
Um, sorry, sorry, sorry.
I get your responses. Um, um, maybe I might go to,
can you, can you give me any indication of how many, um,
what the percentage of DSS uh,
contracts within Copa Maori, um, providers, any indication?
Sure. We've got 39 Maori providers, uh,
and around 330 million that we spend per annum
with our Maori providers at this point in time.
Okay. That's a, yeah. So that, that's a that's a lot.
Yeah. A lot. That, that's a lot.
But that, but that's, it's so much so,
but there's such an unknown quantity then.
'cause when what you opened with, which is, you know,
there's so much of that potential to know and understand.
Yeah. So where's the capability? Where was that missing?
Yeah. What is that about? Yeah. Yeah.
And that's about consistent, um, ignoring
And traditionally the way the services have been
funded to, to AL'S point.
Yeah. You know, we know that there are service gaps
and lack of provision in some places, so we have to,
we have to fix that.
Mm-hmm.
Not a couple of supplementaries come outta that actually.
Just, uh, what the, the data point is something I'm,
you're very interested in
and we've, you know, we've obviously a social investment
agency and the work they're doing
with the IDI integrated data infrastructure.
Um, so I'm interested in how that intersects, if at all,
with, with the work that you are doing. Yeah.
So, um, uh, a couple of things.
So, uh, in the last 12 months, getting a handle on, uh,
our data and where the gaps
are has been really important to us.
One of the first things we've done is
to update the disability data within the IDI,
so we can actually undertake analysis,
um, that, that's been a gap.
And that's something we've heard from the sector as well.
It's been missing. It's really helped them back from their
ability to understand, um, the population.
Um, so having done that, we're kicking off a couple of areas
where we're interested in understanding
how early intervention approaches might work within DSS.
Um, one area is working with, uh, with young people,
particularly those that interact
with young Company Q system.
Um, we know that the greatest predictor of mm-hmm, of, of,
of future dependence on the system is, um, is age.
And so intervening early
and being able to understand what it is
that drives young people into the ARI system
who are disabled and understanding whether
or not we know about their disability, um,
or have the ability to put interventions in place
to support those, uh, disabilities
or support to support whanau
and carers is the other big thing.
Um, we hear all the time that, uh,
if only carers had got more support,
if only whanau had got more support earlier, um,
'cause that's why they want their young people,
they want their young people at home not having
to hand them over to the state
or put them into residential care.
So understanding how we can make care sustainable
and how we can identify those, um, those red flags earlier
and put that support in place is a
really key, um, thing for us.
We're also starting to think about
where assisted technologies, um, can support, um,
people if we are, if we've got a greater understanding of
what works for people intervening early, again with,
with better technology
or solutions to support them to be independent.
That, that leads me to, um, a final ary point
for me on this, but sort of a broader one that comes out
of all of the discussion had so far
around this topic is just,
it's obviously been a major organizational shift.
Mm-hmm. Um, disability support services going back
into ministry, social development.
I was wonder if you'd give us the committee a bit of an idea
of the key milestones that you've achieved, um, since this,
you know, reorganization process has commenced.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Certainly we can look,
it's been a pretty, uh, busy time since, uh,
disability support services transferred into, uh, MSD.
That was in mid-September last year.
We've put in place NAS and EGL budgets.
Um, that's been a cornerstone of getting
that financial stability
and understanding what we are spending and,
and why we are spending it and where we are spending it.
Uh, we've put in place a new budget management framework,
and I know, uh, the committee may well have had questions
about some of the performance measures, uh, that nss, uh,
haven't met in the last year
that's really focused on both improving, uh,
the budget performance, but also the quality
and the service timeliness, um, of the assessments
and the, the allocation to supports that they provide
to disabled people in their whanau carers.
We've undertook that residential pricing review,
but what we haven't probably told the committee about is on
the 1st of December this year, uh,
that new residential pricing model came into play with also,
um, a new approach to, uh, contracting
and commissioning of community group housing.
So we now have, I think's around a hundred providers now,
uh, that have come on board on our new contracts
with improved service specs, which respond to things like,
uh, quality and safeguarding
and upping those service specs in response
to the Royal Commission of Inquiry
and to, um, sadly, abuse and care.
Uh, so that gives also those providers long-term, um,
surety, I guess for 10 year contracts with a rate, uh,
with a five year and five year renewal option
that gives 'em certainty about, um, service
and hopefully the invest, um, the ability
to then think about investing in, uh, the houses
that they run if their community group providers.
And AL'S already talked
to you a little bit about the key changes, uh,
that ministers announced back in September
around a nationally consistent assessment tool and,
and, uh, removing those purchasing guidelines,
which clearly was, uh, um,
the biggest thing we probably heard from communities in the
consultation that we ran in the extensive consultation in
two phases late last year and earlier this year. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, we're gonna move
to the next subject area of housing.
And, uh, first question,
Thank you very much.
Um, just in relationship to
how you manage emergency housing, what are,
what would you consider,
and if you wouldn't mind providing a list to be,
be listening, what you consider
suitable alternative accommodation for people
who may be seeking emergency housing
and maybe asked about other options.
Would you be able to list to us
what you would consider suitable accommodation?
I think, um, what I, what I would say is, um, that, um,
everybody has, um, different types of accommodation, uh,
are suitable for individuals.
Everybody we see, uh, has individual, they, they're not a,
a homogenous group.
Those people seeking emergency housing.
And there'll be a number of ways that we can,
um, assist people.
Um, for some people, uh,
the emergency housing motel may be the last resort,
but, um, they may go into other, um, types of situations.
And look, if, I think if we are thinking about, um,
you know, ricarda, if we're going to places like, um,
boarding houses, boarding houses have been, um,
a longstanding part of the private rental market.
And, uh, they may be, um, um,
for some people they may be a suitable option, um,
for others, um, we may be able to facilitate supporting them
with some type of, um, accommodation assistance.
And they may go into a private boarding situation.
They may go to an, into a flooding situation.
Um, there are people that come to us that we're able
to actually help with getting a job,
and they're able to be more of self-sufficient in terms
of the choices they have around accommodation available.
So, so it's not, um, I, I don't have a particular, um,
answer because individual and just
Add, so just to add to that, obviously, um,
people go into transitional housing range Oh,
I'm sorry. Hard contracts
for, and we've got a social housing.
So, um, particularly in the last couple of years, a lot
of families with children have gone from reaction
to social housing.
So there's a range of different places
people go, which are suitable.
Hmm. So lemme put this scenario to you Say
that you've got somebody who shows up at work and income
and they say, I don't have a home, I mean,
in emergency housing, or else I may be
sleeping without a home tonight.
Mm-hmm. You would be asking a list
of potential alternative accommodations a
person could access.
Right. Um, would couch surfing be one
of the options you would encourage
or consider when asking people
if they have suitable alternative accommodation?
So I think the first thing is if somebody turned up at a
working income site to,
and said, I I need help with housing, we would have
to understand the circumstances.
So that would be the first thing,
and all of their circumstances would apply.
Um, and depending on their circumstances,
sleeping on somebody's couch may be the best option
or maybe an option for them.
None of none of us are saying that
that's a long term option.
But to be blunt, if it, if it's a choice
between somebody doing that in a safe environment
and putting them long term into emergency hotel,
that might be the right thing for them.
So I, it's, it's,
but it's all, it's, you know, I don't think it's a,
is that right for everybody?
Yes. No. Is that right?
For, you know, it's, I think it's a question of you have
to look at all of the circumstances.
Mm. Is couch surfing homelessness? Pardon?
Is couch surfing a form of homelessness?
I think it depends on the definition in terms
of if you talk, so homelessness has a particular definition
in the stats regime.
Mm-hmm. And my memory is that's included
and that I'm, I'm just not the expert on it, so sorry.
So I think, um, as you're colloquial understand
homelessness, that would be basically rough sleeping.
And so Coach Stephen wouldn't be that in terms of, uh,
um, in terms of
Different things just now, can
I, No, no.
Sorry. I meant, um, but in terms of the way stats defines,
um, what's the term?
Substantial, um, uh, unstable housing,
that includes a whole range of things so
that people in transitional housing are
including that definition.
Um, if you are in a house
that actually has some structural problems with it, that
that's part of the definition.
If you're in overcrowded
situations, that's part of the definition.
So depends what definition you use in terms of
how stats reports on that, they use a very broad definition.
Finally, just community organizations have given us
feedback time and time again of its tightening
of eligibility to emergency housing has led
to a direct increase in people sleeping rough.
Um, would you agree with the feedback that you have been
provided by community organizations in
relationship to those changes?
Uh, it's really tricky. Look, there's no formal
or consistent methodology in, um,
in measuring, um, rough sleeping.
And then we are not gonna deny there is, um,
significant demand for, for housing.
Um, what I would say is we actually help people in many
other ways and, you know, from similar people present to us,
and actually their landlords aren't doing the right thing.
And we've got housing brokers that are negotiating
with landlords to ensuring
that they're actually following the obligations
under the RTA.
And we've got people that present to us that have simple
as having a fight with their mom or their nan
or what have you, and,
and we're able to kind of have a chat to them, understand
that like every situation is, is very unique
and, you know, like we, we are worried about.
And so you're confident that out
of all the people you have declined for emergency housing,
none of them went on to be sleeping on the streets?
Yes, but what I can, what I can say to you, um, Ricardo,
is we, um, our, our frontline leaders support our staff.
These are really difficult decisions to make.
And there will be times where we do decline people.
We will decline people that have completed serious damage
to previously in emergency housing motel.
They may have assaulted, uh, uh, situations
that have assaulted alias and other clients.
Um, there are people
that just abandon perfectly good tendencies.
So there will be times that we do decline people.
And I, I can't sugarcoat that may I
Do, But what I, but what I would say,
but what I would say is in relation, so we are very clear
that these are, these are important decisions
that we are being asked to make
and that I'm asking staff to make.
So what we do know is we have strengthened, um,
our processes in relation to
where we do make a decline decision, right.
So if a, if a staff member believes that
that person is not entitled, that decision will be reviewed
by a manager in relation to the declines,
we are also really clear
that it's not just a you apply, you get declined.
You know, good luck out there.
70% of people that we decline, we do provide other support.
That other support might be, as Karen said, paying arrears
because they're in arrears with their current landlord
and they can't see any way out.
And the other 30 pardon and the other
30, Or they may,
they may not be entitled to anything else.
I'm just simply making the point that
what we are doing is we are making sure
that we have a conversation not just about whether they've
met the criteria to get into an emergency house,
it's also about making sure they're getting their full
and correct entitlement.
Whether there are other options for them,
including whether we negotiate with their current landlord,
whether we help facilitate a conversation with their family,
whether we refer them to a community organization
who may be best placed to, um, support them other than us.
So there are a range of outcomes.
So we are very clear
that this is a very important decision, um, for people.
And we are really clear that we've been trying
as best we can to strengthen that process to make sure
that we do the best we can with people,
but some people will not qualify.
Question, can I, sorry, can I just add to that?
Um, so I think it's important to note that, uh, the change
of the gateway are not the only main reason
that numbers have declined.
So numbers, there was a steady decline
and use of housing going back several years, um,
reflecting increased supply of social housing.
And I think Karen's people work really hard with,
and it's been a place like Hamilton, for example, with KO
and other providers to make sure people in emergency housing
got into that, the fast track for, um, so for parents
with children, which put them at the top of the queue
for going into social housing, um,
work much better than I think any of us expected.
And it's resulting a lot of people going out
of emergency housing, been working hard with, hard to try
and make sure that they're using transitional housing
better, as well as the support products that we've had.
And if you look at the trend line, it's actually, uh, the,
the drop, big drop has taking place
before the gateway changes were actually made, uh,
in the regulations in the, of last year.
And, and, and we're still seeing over 250 households a
month going into emergency housing and,
and thinking about, um, Han Maori, um, uh,
still overrepresented unfortunately in emergency housing.
But, um, we've had over 700 households, uh,
go into public housing of those 1400.
Part of that as part of the priority one fast drink.
And I, I think that's, yeah, over, it's over 2000, uh,
children, um, we've seen go into homes out
of emergency housing and we've only got, uh, we used
to have whanau with tamari in emergency housing
for really long periods of time.
It was heartbreaking.
And, um, we've only got a very, uh, you know, a couple
of handfuls of whanau, um,
over in emergency housing over 12 weeks now.
And I mean, that's too long, um, without being in a home.
But, um, it's certainly a huge change from the thousands of,
um, tamari we had in emergency housing. Thank
You.
I just say we, we've got 10 minutes left from the hearing,
so I'll invite questions on the, on all topics for members.
Um, I'll just ask for a concise questions and answers.
Um, but, uh, supplementary,
So supplementary to, um, the conversation
that we've just been having, um,
and I I think you've probably already covered most of it,
but for those people that you are working with
and then find them, um, permanent homes
and the ones that are in emergency housing, what kind
of other services do you provide to those clients to ensure
that, you know, they're not on that treadmill? Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I'll just start and then I'll let Karen kick off.
So what, what we know in relation to people
who do exit emergency housing.
So a lot of people who are in emergency housing now do get
access to support and services, and some of those carry on.
So what we know about the people
who leave emergency housing, we know
where about 80% of them go.
Okay. Right. And so that is 23% go into social housing, 33
and a half percent go into transitional housing, um,
and 23% go into the private rental market.
And that is about making sure that we support people out
of emergency housing to go into appropriate accommodation.
Many of the supports and services transfer with them. Yes.
And I'll just pass Karen, who can talk a little bit about
That. Yeah, I, I
think, um, one
of the other really positive things is, um, people
that are in emergency housing are
part of our case management service.
So not only do they get, um, uh, dedicated case manager
that looks at them holistically, they also get, um, uh,
support services who, as DB said, we've expanded
to follow them, um, into their homes.
And, and actually it's really heartening the people that,
um, are in emergency housing that go into employment.
Right. And it just makes such a difference, um,
for them and their families.
We work with, um, heaps of really fantastic providers
and many of those providers provide a range
of social services and they work really closely with, um,
you, there are people, complex mental health,
they work with mental health providers.
Think about the work that Comcare does down in Christchurch.
Um, so yeah, that we are there.
Um, the support doesn't stop when they
leave emergency housing.
And if they go into and if they go into a private rental,
we'll ensure they get the accommodation supplement.
If they're entitled to, if they go into social housing
or calculate income related rent
sub, they're going, yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah. And we've done add also just a quickly I'd
add, we've um, really tried to work hard
with the private landlord sector to really understand
around the ways that Ms.
D and stay in homes so they can sustain their tendencies.
We don't just work at the bottom of the cliff.
We try to work in a,
a really preventative way for people as well.
New question come. Okay.
Now they told, keep it short, I went
to the women's shelters conference
and I was really shocked by the turn away data that came out
of Canada, which said that people who were trying
to go into the shelters, they down, they never came back.
And I'm concerned about the same trend in emergency housing.
Mm-hmm. Because if those women are in those precarious
positions and they get the message that there is no place
for them, or things are not bad enough,
they will never come back and violence will continue.
Are you aware of that data?
What are you doing to make sure
that those women are identified and they get housing
and that nobody's telling them that it's their own fault
or they've contributed the situation?
'cause they've gone back to a situation which is violent?
I, I think we are really clear, um,
that if somebody prevents to us with family violence, that,
um, we are, um, you know, um, taking that, um, seriously
that we're doing what we can to help them
with family violence coordinators in every single region.
And we also really work closely
with the National Collective,
and I'm not aware of any specific cases that's raised,
but I I agree that's an issue and I'm just sort,
And we also, but we also have the one to three day, um,
we, we are really worried
and we are concerned about what that,
um, that there are issues.
We have got, we have got, um, the ability to put somebody in
for one to three days while we hook them up
with other services
and other places that might be better for them.
So if for example, it is a family violence issue, we would,
we could use that and then we would
talk about family violence, women's refuges.
Just to add to that, that's one of the reasons
that we employ navigators from private NGOs to actually help
with this if people don't wanna engage with us.
So employee navigators, um, to help people.
Um, so if people don't wanna deal with us, they can deal
with a navigator or somebody from a one of our,
um, providers or partners.
So that's not a they a problem with us. They can go there.
Okay. My stuff on this, I'm doing what I know you'll hate,
which I will not tell you who told me this,
but it was one of the sexual violence group, right.
They told me that they had had a woman who had gone
and she had said there was no lock on the door in the
emergency accommodation.
People had told her it wasn't a problem,
and in fact she had been raped.
Okay. So, so I'm, I'm very clear that if we can,
and I understand the sensitivity
around individual cases in this scenario,
but if we can get, um, enough, we don't need to talk
to the person, we don't need to all of that,
but if we can figure out who we can, we can make sure
that we are clear about the expectations.
This is not in any way to try
and put that individual Yeah. Do we put
Already locks on the doors in emergency
accommodation every time? And
We use motels that we don't, so I can't contract supply,
So, um, I can't, and that sounds awful.
I mean, I think we can't believe it.
We did intru a set of basic supply standards, which Yeah.
Should cover that sort of thing. So I think we can
Check that. So appreciate it's
hearsay, et cetera.
No, no, no. I know you're doing that would not,
would be something that we would, um,
Not to distract. We'll be happy
to take that offline with you.
And it, it may be that it's a transitional housing place,
but certainly we don't need to talk about the individual
as DB said, and the
Address of, I Would've brought it to you if I've been
able to, but I can only bring up
that context. I'm sorry. Yeah,
We can make some inquiries generally,
but that would not be something we would deem acceptable.
Thank. End of new Question,
Jane. End of,
uh, the minister touched on the future, um,
services program.
Oh yes, yes. Um, what are the key milestones
and where are you up to, um, all
of those milestones at the moment?
So, um, MSD, um, services for the Future is a big, um,
massive transformation program for the organization.
Started about three years ago
and through budget this year we got, um, uh, funding
to secure funding secured for the rest of the program.
This is, this is a big deal
for New Zealand's welfare system.
Um, I, you know, for time, I won't go on about that,
but suffice to say, it will future proof us so
that we can have a modern system
where New Zealanders can engage with it in,
in a much more agile and modern way.
And we need to be able to do that from a volume point
of view and to just basically to deliver better outcomes.
So that's what we committed to doing.
Um, Tracy, um, voice leads the transformation program
and can talk about a couple of things that we have done
and kind of, um, yeah, the,
And if you can touch on those key milestones.
Yeah. Yeah. So, so, um, the first thing I'd like
to say is we are tracking to plan.
Uh, if I think about we, we, we, last year we were in, um,
procurement discovery and, um, building our case for change.
We've now moved into delivery
and you heard Marma quite excited by one
of the significant milestones, which is about, um,
partnering and delivering that contract system.
Uh, that is a significant milestone for us.
We are currently in what I call, um, build testing mode
for our digital employment service whi which we're expecting
to release the first release in March.
Alongside all of that, we've built the future
for the services, um, model
and we've got a number of components
that we've delivered on,
which then leads us into our future plans.
So we are planning for what next comes.
Uh, and that's quite a significant piece
at, at this point in time.
And, you know, any of these modern transformations now
need to be so cognizant of the fact
that technology is so fast.
You know, so we are very conscious of the fact that,
you know, what we don't wanna do is build something
that locks us into not being agile in the future.
So that, that, you know, the new technology
that's coming on, we are very cognizant of that.
Sure. Question. Thank you.
Your ethnic communities family violence program
that you have, uh, ongoing.
I know that you've done the community engagement, I know
that it's led to some workbooks mm-hmm.
And, um, resources, uh,
but I can't find a report on that was meant to sort
of collect findings, right.
Um, from the different communities
and add to what information government has about
how violence prevents within ethnic community and what next.
Can you give me an update on that?
Um, yeah, I can get some of the information.
I was gonna say, I think, yeah,
I think we have got information coming through.
It will be very soon. Yeah.
Right. Super quick. Thank you.
So thank you.
Just circling back on general questions, um,
can you please quickly confirm the breakdown
of the 12 non financial sanctions you've applied so far?
How many of them were community work experience
or money management?
So I, I said to, um, you know, that we would give you,
um, that information. I haven't got, I haven't got
It in that case. A really
quick fire question as well.
Um, how many people, um,
the supported living payment had their benefit canceled
as a result of changes in the relationship status?
Oh, I wouldn't have that information.
I'm, I'd have to, I'm not even, yes,
we would be able to tell you that.
Um, we can get that information.
Okay. Very last question. The monument. Thank you.
Sorry. Merry Christmas. Yes, Absolutely.
It's, it's related to the redress for Abuse and
Care. Oh yes. Just
That program and um, sort of, I guess it's that
the assessment and and payment schedule
and those things that are critical.
Can you just give us a quick
Yep. So
budget, I can do it really quickly.
Budget 25 gave us $38 million. Yeah.
For two more years to continue to, um,
process historic claims.
We also got, oh, sorry, $81 million.
We also got, um, um, another $38 million for the top up.
Yep, yep. And um, Nadine, how many have we done?
So over overall, um, in the last year we've done, um,
over 1090 settlement claims.
That's the highest we've ever done.
We're on track to do 1,300 this year in the top up space.
Um, that work started in May
after the minister announced it, taken 24,000 phone calls
or made, made and taken 24,000 phone calls
and made over a thousand payments in that space.
We are tracking really well, um, in terms of some
of the things that we hear from the claimants that we work
with every day is that timeliness really matters.
Yes. Um, it really matters to them.
So with the kind of 75% of direct claimants that we work
with, um,
we are actually seeing a real increase in the
timeliness of those.
So in the last year, we've um, been able
to make payments 12 months earlier than
we would've previously.
So we are seeing that trap begin to change, which is, um,
really exciting for, um, the work
that the historic claims team do every day
with our survivors.
That, um, takes a lot to get to the point
where you want to make that call.
Um, people sit on that
for many years, as you will well know.
So we hear amazing feedback.
If you've got one minute, I'd love to share something
with you that we got, uh, sent to us last week by one
of our families that we've been working with.
Uh, 'cause I think they say it better than I can.
Um, I wanna thank you.
I wanna start by thanking you personally
for everything you've done for you, my dad, and for us.
Your support follow up
and the way that you genuinely care for people that you work
with has made this incredibly emotional process
so much easier to face.
You've been steady, respectful,
and compassionate every step,
and it means more than I can ever express.
I would like to ask that you please pass this
email to your management.
Um, and to you, you deserve recognition at a higher level
for the way that you work and your dedication
and the way you work alongside people is exceptional.
Thank you. Again, not just for the work
that you do, but the way you do it.
You've made this journey bearable
and your dedication has meant more to us than you all know.
I think that's a nice way to perhaps end the session
in terms of the things that really matter to New Zealanders.
And this is an area, um, the team that works
for me is very passionate about.
Um, and we wanna work alongside people as, uh, part
of this very difficult journey
for many of them. Thank, thank
You. Thank,
thank you. That, that is a good way
to end the session and take the opportunity on behalf
committee to thank, uh, you and your leadership team
and all of your teams across the country supporting New
Zealanders in challenging moments in their lives
or periods of their lives, and also supporting them, um,
to employment for those who are able
to have that opportunity.
So, um, look, thank, thank you. Thank you.